GOOD
EVENING EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO
THE JUNE 16 MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
IF YOU'RE ABLE PLEASE RISE AND
JOIN US FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE
FOLLOWED BY THE PLEDGE
OF ALLEGIANCE
PLEDGE ALLEGIANCE
TO UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND
TO THE REPUBLIC, SAYS ONE
NATION.
IT IS ALL WITH LIBERTY AND
JUSTICE FOR ALL BUT OUR CLERK
PLEASE CALL THE ROLE OF COUNSEL
COMES FROM BRITISH HERE
COUNCILOR HARRISON APSA
CUSTOMER WATSON BEER CATAMOUNT
PILFERER DENHA HERE BEING HERE
MAYOR TAYLOR HERE COMES EITHER
HERE OR ACTION HERE FROM BREAKS
HERE COMES FOR KORNEL HERE WE
HAVE A QUORUM.
MAKE THE MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA MUBI
COUNCILOR R SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER ACCORDING TO THE
DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA FILE
FAVOR POSED THE AGENDA IS
APPROVED.
WE HAVE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR
LORD MAYOR.
>> WE HAVE ONE INTRODUCTION
TODAY FROM THE ANN ARBOR AREA
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY.
MR CARPENTER, MR CARPENTER, THE
GOOD EVENING MR. MAYOR.
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
IT'S NICE TO SEE YOU AGAIN.
HAPPY SUMMER.
I DIDN'T WEAR THE JACKET ON THE
WALK OVER BUT JUST A COUPLE
OF UPDATES FOR YOU OPERATIONAL
A FEW SERIOUS ONES, A COUPLE
OF MORE EASIER ONES AS TO EASE
US INTO THE SUMMER HERE.
SO FIRST OF ALL, AS YOU MAY
KNOW, THE DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY AND THE RIGHT PARTNER
FOR MANY YEARS ON THE GET
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM AS SOME OF US
ARE VERY FAMILIAR WITH THAT IT
OPERATES A CHALLENGE EVERY DAY
CALLED THE COMMUTER CHALLENGE
SHOW WHERE WE IT'S A CONTEST
CHALLENGING FOLKS GOING TO WORK
TO DO IT OTHER THAN A CAR TO
WALK, TO BIKE, TO TAKE TRANSIT,
TO TAKE A SKATEBOARD, WHATEVER
IT IS IN AN EFFORT TO REDUCE
CARBON EMISSIONS.
VERY HAPPY TO SAY WE HAD VERY
SUCCESSFUL YEAR THIS YEAR OVER
640 FOLKS PARTICIPATED 100 MORE
THAN LAST YEAR.
COLLECTIVELY THE CITY SAVED
ABOUT NINETY SIX THOUSAND
POUNDS OF CARBON EMISSIONS
WHICH IS EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT A
FORTY FORTY THREE ACRE FOREST
FOR A YEAR.
SO GOOD JOB EVERYONE.
WELL DONE.
AS YOU MAY ALSO BE AWARE, THE
RIDE HAS A TARGET FOR OUR OWN
EMISSIONS FOOTPRINT.
WE HOPE TO BE CARBON CARBON
FREE BY TWENTY FORTY FIVE AND A
BIG PART OF THAT BEING A
TRANSPORTATION COMPANY IS
OF COURSE OUR BUS FLEET WITH
EACH BUS TAKING LIFESPAN
OF ABOUT TWELVE YEARS WE HAVE
TO PLAN WELL IN ADVANCE TO MAKE
THAT TRANSITION.
SOME OF YOU WERE WITH US LAST
YEAR WHEN WE WERE LUCKY ENOUGH
TO WIN TWENTY FIVE MILLION
DOLLARS GRANT FROM THE FEDERAL
TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION TO BEGIN
PURCHASING LOW AND NO EMISSIONS
VEHICLES.
WE'VE PERIODICALLY UPDATED YOU
GUYS ON THAT AS WE'VE GONE
ALONG AS WITH MANY FEDERAL
GRANTS THESE DAYS THE WHEELS
ARE TURNING MORE SLOWLY THAN
NORMAL.
WE HAVE NOT YET BEEN ABLE TO
OBLIGATE THESE FUNDS BUT WE
THINK WE ARE RIGHT ON THE
PRECIPICE BEING ABLE TO DO SO.
SO I LOOK FORWARD TO BEING ABLE
TO TELL YOU THE NEXT TIME I'M
HERE THAT WE ARE IN RECEIPT
OF THE FUNDS AND WE CAN BEGIN
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THAT
PROJECT.
SO EXCITING THERE ANOTHER
EXCITING UPDATE EVERY YEAR WE
PARTNER WITH THE ANN ARBOR AND
YPSILANTI DISTRICT LIBRARIES
PREFER THEIR SUMMER GAME
PARTNERSHIP A WONDERFUL THING.
THEY'RE PARTICULARLY FOR
FAMILIES.
IF YOU'D LIKE TO TAKE THE KIDS
OUT FOR THE WEEKEND AND DO
SOMETHING YOUR LIBRARY PASS
WE'LL GET YOU FREE BUS FARE.
SO SHOW UP ON ANY OF OUR BUSSES
WITH YPSILANTI OR ANN ARBOR
LIBRARY CARD WILL HAPPILY JUST
LET YOU RIDE WHEREVER YOU'D
LIKE TO GO.
SO WE'LL LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
YOU SATURDAY OR SUNDAY BETWEEN
NOW AND AUGUST THE TWENTY
FOURTH.
THERE'S A LOT GOING ON DOWNTOWN
AS I'M SURE YOU ARE AWARE.
THE FORMER WILLOTT FOURTH
AVENUE IN THE BLAKE TRANSIT
CENTER WITH YOUR SUPPORT MANY
YEARS AGO ACTUALLY AT THIS
POINT YOU ENABLED THE ANN ARBOR
HOUSING COMMISSION TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH THE REDEVELOPMENT
OF THE FORMER LOT AS PART
OF THAT YOU ASK THEM TO LOOK
INTO TRYING TO HELP IMPROVE THE
ADJOINING BLAKE TRANSIT CENTER.
IS THERE ANYTHING THAT CAN BE
DONE TO IMPROVE PUBLIC TRANSIT
IN THE SITE?
I'M HAPPY TO SAY THAT IS MOVING
FORWARD VERY WELL.
WE DO HAVE A SITE DESIGN THAT
SEEMS TO ACCOMMODATE EVERYBODY
ON THAT SITE SO I'M EXCITED
ABOUT THAT.
WE'RE LOOKING FORWARD TO
SUBMITTING OUR OWN SITE PLAN
FOR THAT.
AT THE SAME TIME US IN THE
DENHA HAVE
BEEN WORKING ON
OPPORTUNITIES ON FOURTH AVENUE.
WE WERE RECENTLY AWARDED FOUR
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR GRANT
THE TWO OF US BY M NOT FOR THE
RECONSTRUCTION OF FOURTH AVENUE
LOTS OF GOOD PEDESTRIAN AND
STREET AMENITIES AS WELL AS
SOME TRANSIT AMENITIES IN THERE
AS WELL.
SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR SUPPORT
THERE.
THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
AN EXCITING ONE THAT ABSOLUTELY
NO ONE HAS ANY STRONG FEELINGS
ABOUT.
BUT WE DO WANT TO JUST SAY FROM
THE TRANSIT AUTHORITY'S POINT
OF VIEW WE WERE VERY GRATIFIED
TO SEE THE IDEA OF TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT REALLY
BEING TAKEN UP IN THE EARLIER
VERSIONS OF THAT PLAN.
THE IDEA OF PUTTING HIGH
DENSITY MIXED USE PEDESTRIAN
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT ALONG HIGH
FREQUENCY TRANSIT CORRIDORS IS
ABSOLUTELY BEST PRACTICE.
IT'S WHAT EVERY TEXTBOOK SAYS
YOU SHOULD DO.
YOU'RE SIMPLY TRYING TO GET AS
MANY PEDESTRIANS IN PROXIMITY
TO HIGH FREQUENCY PUBLIC
TRANSIT AS YOU CAN.
IT'S A WIN WIN.
SO THANK YOU.
WE LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING HOW
THAT PLAN CONTINUES TO EVOLVE
AND THEN FINALLY HERE JUST TO
WRAP IT UP, ONE MORE NICE THING
WE ARE EXCITED TO CONTINUE TO
PARTICIPATE IN YOUR FOURTH
OF JULY PARADE COMING UP NEXT
MONTH.
WE LOOK FORWARD TO HAVING ONE
OF OUR BUSSES IN THERE AS WELL
AS STAFF AND BOARD MEMBERS.
I AM TOLD LAST YEAR OUR CANDY
CANDY THROWING WAS
UNFORTUNATELY INTERRUPTED WHEN
WE RAN OUT OF CANDY.
SO I HAVE DOUBLED THE
PROCUREMENT OF CANDY.
SO PLEASE COME TO THE PARADE
AND GET SOME CANDY.
MR. AIR, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
YOUR TIME THIS EVENING.
>> YOU ALL HAVE A WONDERFUL
MEETING.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH
.
OK, WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC
COMMENT RESERVE TIME, PUBLIC
TIME RESERVE TIME IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
AT PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME
ONE NEEDS TO HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE BY CONTACTING YOUR CITY
CLERK SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES
WELL HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION TO THE TIME OUR
CLERK OR THE TIME WILL NOTIFY
YOU IN THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND SEE
THE FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS RITA
MITCHELL
.
>> GOOD EVENING COUNCIL.
I'M RITA MITCHELL.
I LIVE AT SIX TWENTY ONE FIFTH
STREET ON THE WEST SIDE IN WARD
FIVE.
I'M HERE TO TALK WITH YOU ABOUT
THE INCLUSION OF NATURAL
FEATURES IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
WE'RE ALL CONNECTED.
WE BREATHE THE AIR, SHARE WATER
AND BENEFIT FROM PRODUCTION
OF FOOD FROM THE EARTH.
WE'RE ALL PART OF NATURE AND I
HAVE A FEELING THAT EACH OF YOU
HAS SPOKEN OUT AND SUPPORTIVE
OF THE ENVIRONMENT OVER THE
COURSE OF YOUR TERMS, YOUR
CAMPAIGNS FOR OFFICE, YOUR LIFE
AND THAT'S WHAT WE ALL SHOULD
BE DOING.
I'M ASKING YOU TO PROVE YOUR
ENVIRONMENTAL CREDIBILITY BY
FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATION
OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
COMMISSIONS RESOLUTION THAT WAS
PASSED UNANIMOUSLY ON MAY 22ND.
WE RECOMMENDED THAT THE COUNCIL
DIRECT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
TO CONSIDER THE INCLUSION OF A
SET OF ESTABLISHED AND UPDATED
NATURAL FEATURES POLICIES ALONG
WITH OTHER EXISTING PLANS THAT
ARE BEING INCORPORATED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
AND WE WANT YOU TO RECOMMEND
THAT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
WORK IN COLLABORATION WITH THE
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
COMMISSION.
IN DOING SO, DON'T EXCLUDE
NATURAL FEATURES FROM THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
IT'S ESSENTIAL THE COMMISSION'S
GOALS AND ACTIONS ARE INTENDED
TO SUPPORT THE HEALTH AND
WELFARE OF THE COMMUNITY IN THE
FUTURE WE MUST USE CREATIVE
STRATEGIES TO RETAIN THE GREEN
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT SUPPORTS
LIFE.
THE COMMISSION RECOGNIZES THE
COMPLEXITY OF INCLUDING NATURAL
FEATURES TREES, PLANTS,
WETLANDS PRESERVATION AND
MITIGATION STRATEGIES.
THEY'RE NOT NECESSARILY
STRAIGHTFORWARD BUT THEY DO
EXIST AND THEY WORK.
THEY WORK FOR US.
WE MUST AVOID HAVING TO
COMPENSATE IN THE FUTURE FOR
LOSS OF THESE IMPORTANT
FEATURES THAT KEEP US ALIVE
THAT PROVIDE ESSENTIALS
INCLUDING THE JOYS OF WATCHING
A POLLINATOR MOVE FROM PLAN TO
PLAN THE FRESH FEELING OF AIR
FOLLOWING A RAINSTORM AND THE
ENERGY SAVINGS FROM LARGE TREES
THAT PROTECT US AND PROVIDE
SHADE.
WE CAN'T REPLACE EXISTING
NATURAL FEATURES.
>> ONCE THEY'RE GONE THEY'RE
GONE.
THEY CANNOT BE RECREATED AND WE
HAVE TO DO THIS IN TIME TO
ADDRESS THE CLIMATE CRISIS WE
PROVIDE A COUNCIL WITH A
ROADMAP FOR INCLUDING NATURAL
FEATURES IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
>> IT'S UP TO YOU TO TAKE
ACTION.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS SAM HOMINUM
.
>> HELLO MY NAME IS SAM
HOHMANN.
I LIVE ON FOURTEEN FIFTY ONE
COLOR ROAD KLUWER.
IT'S KIND OF FUNNY THE ROAD
IT'S ABOUT 300 YARDS LONG JUTS
OFF OF PACARD AND THE REASON I
WON'T TALK TODAY IS DC TWO.
I BELIEVE IT IS ON YOUR AGENDA
.
YOU ARE SEEKING EASEMENT AT THE
END OF MY ROAD THROUGH WOODGATE
GARDENS AND THE WAY COLOR ENDS
IT JUST ABRUPTLY ENDS WHAT I
BELIEVE IS A CONFLICTING LAND
USE BARRIER WITH WOODBURY
GARDENS.
WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO ASK IS
THAT IN ADDITION TO THE UTILITY
EASEMENT YOU'RE GETTING THAT
YOU WOULD KINDLY LOOK INTO
GETTING A TEN FOOT WIDE
PEDESTRIAN EASEMENT ALONG THERE
AND THIS WOULD REALLY SERVE TWO
PURPOSES ONE, IT WOULD CONNECT
SOUTH BOULEVARD TO THE NORTH
OF ME AND COLAR TOGETHER THAT
WAY AND DOWN TO WOODBURY PARK.
AND SECONDLY IT WOULD ALLOW
ACCESS TO THE UTILITY POLES.
WE HAVE A LOT OF POWER OUTAGES
IN THE AREA AS A RESULT OF ALL
THE TREES AND BARRIER FALLING
ON THOSE.
SO IF THEY HAD AN ACCESS ACCESS
PATHWAY THERE WOULD ALLOW MUCH
BETTER MAINTENANCE AND
RELIABILITY SO PLEASE CONSIDER
ADDING A PEDESTRIAN EASEMENT TO
THAT ITEM ON YOUR AGENDA.
THANK YOU.
THANK.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ELLEN
HABOUR
.
HELLO.
COUNCIL.
I'M SORRY THE MOTION ON THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND I'VE
BEEN AWARE AND SYMPATHETIC TO
THE VIEW THAT THAT WHOLE
PROCESS HAS BEEN MOVING MUCH
TOO FAST WITHOUT ACCOUNTABILITY
AND SUFFICIENT PUBLIC PURCHASE
OF PATIENT AND THAT I DIDN'T
SEE ANY SENSE IN THE REPORT
THAT THERE WAS SOME
CONSIDERATION TOWARD PASSING
THE TIMELINE ON THIS APPROVAL
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND
IT'S EDITING.
I WENT TO A MEETING AND THERE
WAS NO RECOGNITION THERE OF THE
MASTER PLAN IN WHICH THE CENTER
OF THE CITY IS A FOCUS AND THE
COMMONS THAT IS PART OF THE
CITY CHARTER.
THERE'S NOT REALLY AN ALIGNMENT
THAT I SAW BETWEEN THE TWO
DOCUMENTS OF CITY POLICY, THE
MASTER PLAN AND THAT'S INVOLVED
IN COMPREHENSIVE PLAN C LIKE
ANN ARBOR DOT COM THE WAY YOU
MR. WHO IS BECOMING YOU MISS
DOT COM A CORPORATION NO LONGER
A COUNTY WITH CHARACTER AND
CHARACTERS.
IT'S NOW MASS SCALE.
WE MOVED NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER
MASSIVE SCALE ARE SUFFICIENT AS
THE MEASURES THE BUSINESS MIND
WORK REMOVES THE CHARACTER AND
SUBJECTIVITY AND COMMUNITY
HISTORICAL MEMORY.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT'S NOT
RIGHT AND HOW THIS IS BEING
DEVELOPED AND IT'S ABANDONING
AFFORDABILITY EXCEPT IN THE
WRONG BUT NOT FOR THE PEOPLE
NOW AND THE PEOPLE NOW ARE PART
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN NOT
ONLY FOR THOSE WHO MIGHT
EXPECTEDLY COME HERE
PROJECTIONS SEEM FAR OUT
OF LINE AS TO WHAT WE EITHER
DESIGN AREN'T AS LIKELY AS OUR
POPULATION INCREASE.
THE PLAN IGNORES THE CURRENT IT
SHOULD RECOGNIZE THE EXISTING
REAL EVEN IF YOU WILL AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION WANT TO
OVERTURN IT.
THAT'S WHAT I'VE BEEN CALLING
TOTALITARIAN DEMOCRACY IN KINGS
HERE AND PRINCES I GUESS IF YOU
WANTED A FAIR ELECTION ON THE
QUESTION OF THE COMMONS YOU
WOULD HAVE IT ON THE BALLOT IN
NOVEMBER 2026 WHEN PEOPLE COME
OUT NOW AND A CITY COUNCIL HAS
ALREADY MADE A RESOLUTION NEVER
TO HAVE A HALF YEAR OR SUMMER
ELECTION ANYHOW THE IF YOU
WOULD NOT WRITE IT OUT OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IT'S NOT AS
THOUGH IT'S NOT IN THE CITY
CHARTE ANYHOW.
THE COMMONS IS ON THE AGENDA.
THANK YOU AND YOU SHOULD
RECOGNIZE IT.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS CATHY
GRISWOLD
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
I'M HERE TO ADDRESS AN URGENT
AND UNACCEPTABLE REALITY OUR
ESCALATING PEDESTRIAN CRASH
RATE A DIRECT CONSEQUENCE
OF MISPLACED PRIORITIES IN OUR
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
CONSIDER A TWENTY ONE ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IS
AUTHORIZED.
WE'RE GOING TO DISCUSS TONIGHT
POSSIBLY APPROVE IT FOR A
CONSULTANT TO STUDY PROPOSED
PARKING STRUCTURES.
THIS COULD IMMEDIATELY FUND
CRITICAL SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS AT
MULTIPLE KNOWN CRASH SITES.
THIS ALLOCATION EXEMPLIFIES A
PROJECT CENTRIC GOVERNANCE
MODEL THAT OFFERED PRIORITIZES
CONSULTANTS OVER THE IMMEDIATE
NEEDS OF OUR RESIDENTS.
AND THIS ISN'T MERELY ABOUT
FUNDING, IT'S ABOUT A CULTURE.
FOR INSTANCE, THE DEVELOPER
OF THE MILLION DOLLAR CONDOS ON
SUNSET I'LL PAUSE FOR A SECOND
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THE MAYOR
AND THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
REALLY NEED TO HEAR THIS.
THE DEVELOPER
OF A MILLION
DOLLAR CONDO ON SUNSET TOLD ME
HE WAS DIRECTED NOT TO PUT
INSIDE TALKS, NOT TO PUT IN
SIDEWALKS IN FRONT OF HIS
CONDOS WHERE THERE WAS A
DOCUMENTED NEED OVER SIX MONTHS
AGO BECAUSE SOMEONE WAS
INJURED.
WHY IN THE WORLD DON'T WE PUT
IN THE SIDEWALKS AND TELL THE
DEVELOPER HE CAN'T I DON'T
KNOW.
THE HUMAN COST IS UNDENIED UP
AT THE SITE OF A FATAL CRASH ON
HURON WHERE A PERSON IN A
WHEELCHAIR TRAGICALLY DIED
FOLLOWING A RALLY ON SATURDAY.
I OBSERVED DANGEROUSLY UNEVEN
ASPHALT AND A SIDEWALK CLOSED
SIGN.
THAT'S FINE EXCEPT IT WAS RIGHT
BEFORE A CROSSWALK.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN WHEN YOU
HAVE A SIDEWALK CLOSED SIGN IN
FRONT OF THE CROSSWALK?
SO EVERYONE JUST WENT AROUND IT
CAN USE THE CROSSWALK.
I HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THAT MEANT.
FURTHERMORE, CITY DIRECT AID
CONTRACTOR CONTRACTOR PARKING
IN THE STREET SUCH AS THE RIGHT
TURN LANE ON HURON PARKWAY
GLACIER OBSTRUCTS SIGHTLINES
AND CREATES UNNECESSARY
HAZARDS.
WHY CAN'T WE SIMPLY TELL OUR
CONTRACTORS DON'T PARK IN THE
STREET?
I DON'T KNOW.
WE CAN NO LONGER TOLERATE THIS.
OUR CITY'S PERSISTENT FOCUS ON
PROJECTS OFTEN AT THE EXPENSE
OF HUMAN CENTRIC SOLUTIONS IS
DIRECTLY FUELING A PREVENTABLE
CRISIS.
WE DEMAND AN IMMEDIATE AND
FUNDAMENTAL SHIFT IN PRIORITIES
INVEST DIRECTLY IN OUR
RESIDENTS SAFETY, ENFORCE
COMMON SENSE PROTECTIONS AND
ALLOW BUREAUCRATIC AND CEASE
ALLOWING BUREAUCRATIC OR
PROJECT DRIVEN DECISIONS TO
JEOPARDIZE LIVES.
OUR COMMUNITY SAFETY DEPENDS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JEFFCO
JEFFCOAT FIFTH WARD.
I WANT TO THANK YOU ALL FOR
PLACE YOUR PROPOSAL AND BE ON
THE BALLOT IN AUGUST WHICH I
BELIEVE IF PASSED WILL CREATE
MULTIPLE WINS FOR THE
COMMUNITY.
IT'S MY OPINION THAT THE TWENTY
EIGHTEEN BALLOT MEASURE
PROPOSING A PARK ON LIBERTY LOT
WAS FUNDAMENTALLY DISHONEST.
I BELIEVE THAT PROPONENTS
OF THE MEASURE SUCCEEDED IN
SELLING ANN ARBOR RESIDENTS IN
UNFUNDED FANTASY.
THE QUESTION THAT WAS PLACED
BEFORE ANAMBRA VOTERS IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN IS SIMPLE WOULD YOU
LIKE A PARK DOWNTOWN BUT A MORE
HONEST AND TRANSPARENT QUESTION
WOULD HAVE BEEN ARE YOU WILLING
TO GIVE UP THE FOLLOWING SIX
THINGS FOR A PARK DOWNTOWN?
ONE ARE YOU WILLING TO GIVE ARE
YOU WILLING FOR THE CITY TO
GIVE UP TEN MILLION DOLLARS
FROM THE SALE OF THE LAND HALF
OF WHICH WOULD GO TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
TWO ARE YOU WILLING TO GIVE UP
HUNDREDS OF NEW DWELLING UNITS
ON THE SITE AND THE VITALITY
THEY WOULD GENERATE THREE ARE
YOU WILLING TO GIVE UP MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS OF TAX BASE IN
PERPETUITY TO THE CITY AND THE
PUBLIC LIBRARY?
THE RIDE C AND A. PUBLIC
SCHOOLS FOR ARE YOU WILLING TO
SPEND MILLIONS OF TAXPAYER
MILLIONS OF TAXPAYER DOLLARS TO
CONSTRUCT A USABLE PARK ON THE
LIBRARY LOT EITHER BY
INCREASING TAXES OR BY NOT
INVESTING IN OTHER CITY PARKS?
FIVE ARE YOU WILLING TO SPEND
PART DOLLARS ON ANNUAL
MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY THE
DOWNTOWN PARK BY REDUCING
INVESTMENTS AND OTHER CITY
PARKS SIX ARE YOU WILLING TO
SPEND ENORMOUS AMOUNTS OF MONEY
EACH YEAR TO ACTIVATE THE PARK?
DAN GILBERT SPENDS MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS FOR PROGRAMING AT
CAMPUS MARTIUS IN DETROIT TO
ENSURE IT'S A SAFE AND INVITING
PUBLIC PLAZA BECAUSE HE KNOWS
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO THE PLAZA
WITHOUT ACTIVATION.
SOME OF YOU MAY REMEMBER WHEN
FORMER EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE ANNENBERG PUBLIC LIBRARY
JOSEPH PARKER SPOKE TO COUNCIL
IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN ABOUT THE
CHALLENGES THE DOWNTOWN BRANCH
LIBRARY FACED REGARDING
VISITORS DEALING WITH UNTREATED
MENTAL ILLNESS AND SUBSTANCE
ABUSE.
SHE MADE IT CLEAR THAT FOLKS
WHO DIDN'T HAVE A LOT OF PLACES
TO BE DURING THE DAY WOULD BE
HANGING OUT AT THIS PROPOSED
PARK AT THE LIBRARY A LOT WHICH
WOULD REQUIRE AN ENORMOUS
INVESTMENT IN ACTIVATION AND
SECURITY INSTEAD OF BEING
TRANSPARENT PROPONENTS OF THE
TWENTY BALLOT MEASURE DECIDED
TO IGNORE ALL OF THE COMPLEX
ISSUES INCLUDING THE FACT THAT
THERE WAS NO FUNDING MECHANISM
TO CONSTRUCT A PARK REGULARLY
ACTIVATE IT OR MAINTAIN IT.
THE TWENTY EIGHTEEN BALLOT
MEASURE TURNED AND TURNED INTO
AN OUTBURST BREXIT.
IT BASICALLY ASKED VOTERS A
SIMPLE QUESTION ABOUT A COMPLEX
MULTIDIMENSIONAL ISSUE.
THE TWENTY EIGHTEEN PROPOSAL
WAS WELL INTENTIONED BUT
FUNDAMENTALLY DISINGENUOUS AND
DISCONNECTED FROM REALITY.
THANK YOU ALL FOR BEING
RESPONSIBLE LEADERS AND
ATTEMPTING TO TURN AFTER
BREXIT.
LEMON INTO LEMONADE.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS WILLIAM
LIESJE THOUGH I'D LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT THAT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
AND I'D LIKE TO SUPPORT AND
DEFEND A DECISION MADE BY THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THAT
DECISION IS TO NOT CREATE A
SEPARATE INDUSTRIAL CATEGORY IN
THE FUTURE LAND USE MAP AND I
THINK THAT DECISION IS MAYBE
SURPRISING AT FIRST GLANCE
BECAUSE THERE'S A COMMON NOTION
I THINK THAT IN A CITY YOU
WOULD SEGREGATE A CERTAIN AREA
FOR NOXIOUS OR MESSY USES THAT
YOU WOULDN'T WANT TO ALLOW
ELSEWHERE.
BUT I THINK IF YOU LOOK CLOSER
AT THE CURRENT CITY ZONING
POLICIES, YOU CAN SEE WHY THE
PLANNING COMMISSION MADE THAT
DECISION RIGHT NOW IN ANN ARBOR
OUR M1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS ALLOW LOTS OF LAND
USES INCLUDING VERY SENSITIVE
ONES.
SO LIBRARIES, SCHOOLS AND
MEDICAL CLINICS, DAYCARES,
NURSING HOMES ALL OF THOSE ARE
ALLOWED RIGHT NOW IN OUR MEONE
DISTRICTS.
>> SO TO PURPOSELY REZONE THOSE
AREAS TO ALLOW MEZZA INDUSTRIAL
USES WOULD BE A NOVEL IDEA AND
NOT ONE THAT WOULD BE SAFE OR
IN THE INTEREST OF THE CITY'S
HEALTH AND WELFARE.
>> SO I THINK WHAT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION DID IS THEY LOOKED
AT THESE DISTRICTS AND SAID
THESE ARE LOW DENSITY MIXED USE
DISTRICTS.
LET'S PLAN TO REZONE TO BE
MEDIUM DENSITY MIXED USE
DISTRICTS AND I THINK THAT
DECISION MAKES A LOT OF SENSE
AND IS PRUDENT AND WISE.
SO I THINK YOU CAN FEEL REALLY
GOOD ABOUT SUPPORTING THAT
DECISION AND I WOULD ASK THAT
YOU NOT ASK THEM TO CHANGE IT.
>> YOU THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS STEPHEN
TRENGOVE.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
IT'S PLEASURE TO BE WITH YOU
AGAIN AND AGAIN.
I CONSIDER YOU A FRIEND BUT
I'VE GOT TO CALL YOU ON THIS
ONE ON THE OBSERVER IN THE
OBSERVER YOU STATED THAT THERE
CANNOT BE A BUILDING OVER THE
PARKING LOT.
THIS IS ON TOP OF A 20 STOREY
BUILDING IN CHINA.
>> THEY HAVE CREATED A TALLER
THAN THE CEILING IN CHINA.
>> NO, I DID A PROJECT JUST
FINISHED DOING A PROJECT FOR
WALL STREET AND THEY'RE VERY
PROUD OF A SPACE ABOUT THE SIZE
FROM THIS SIDE.
THEY HIRED ME TO PROMOTE THEM
AND THEY'RE VERY PROUD OF THEIR
WEBSITE WHICH IS THE SITE
OF OUR OF OUR LIBRARY LOT.
YOU PROUD IN THE MORNING AND
THEY LOVE IT NOW WE WANT TO
HAVE BUILDINGS DO WE WANT TO
HAVE BUILDINGS THAT WE WERE I
DON'T THINK SO.
SOMEONE HAVE TO BE IN THE DON
QUIXOTE.
MY MISTRESS IS DOWN ON AS LONG
AS I'M ALIVE THEY WILL NOT BE A
BUILDING THE PIPE BY MYSELF A
FIVE WITH MY FRIEND WE WILL NOT
ALLOW THAT.
ALL WE'RE ASKING FOR IS MORE
TREES AND MORE PLEASANT
ENVIRONMENT.
YOU CAN'T THE LIBRARY CAN'T
JUST TURN OVER AND BECOME A
DEVELOPER OVERNIGHT AND IN
REALLY TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE
TOP PROPERTY OF ANN ARBOR.
WE DON'T WE'RE NOT ASKING FOR
MONEY FROM YOU.
WE'RE NOT ASKING FOR MONEY.
WE'LL GET A DONOR WILL MAINTAIN
IT.
>> THAT'S ALL WE'RE ASKING MORE
TREES.
THERE'S NOTHING THERE'S NOTHING
WRONG WITH THAT.
>> THERE'S NO YOU'VE BOLITA
OVER TALK TO MYSELF INTO THESE
SITUATIONS.
I THINK I'VE MADE MY MY POINT.
ANY ONE OF YOU WILLING TO FIGHT
BANABA THIS IS A TIME TO DO IT.
WE NEED MORE TREES.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
WELL OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PETER
CORRADI.
HELLO HOW ARE YOU.
GOOD.
I'M HERE FOR A LITTLE DIFFERENT
REASON.
I WAS GOING TO JOKE AND SAY I'M
HERE TO COMPLAIN BUT I TOLD THE
CLERK THAT IT WAS ALL GOING TO
BE PASSIVE.
I READ DEVELOP THE ORIGINAL
CORRIGIN AND HE'S WILLIAM
STREET AND IT WAS PROBABLY THE
TOUGHEST THING I'VE EVER DONE.
WE THOUGHT IT WOULD BE A TWO
WEEK PROJECT.
IT TURNED INTO LIKE A TWO MONTH
PROJECT LIKE A 14 MONTH
PROJECT.
THEY WERE THERE SEVENTY FIVE
YEARS AND EVERYTHING NOW IS
BRAND NEW NEW LACRIMAL, NEW
PLUMBING, NEW EVERYTHING.
BUT THE REASON I'M HERE IS
BECAUSE I HEARD A LOT
OF NEGATIVE THINGS ABOUT THE
ANN ARBOR BUILDING DEPARTMENT
AND GOOD LUCK HOW TOUGH IT WAS
GOING TO BE AND I HAD TO LET
YOU KNOW IT WAS THE MOST
POSITIVE EXPERIENCE EVER.
THEY WERE GREAT.
THEY WERE TRAPPED.
THEY WERE COURTEOUS.
THEY WERE EVEN VERY NICE.
SO VERY POSITIVE EXPERIENCE AND
MAYBE I DON'T BELONG HERE BUT
ANYWAYS SO I MEAN IT'S NICE TO
HEAR THAT FOR A CHANGE BECAUSE
I DID HEAR A LOT OF NEGATIVE
THINGS AND I'VE DEALT WITH A
LOT OF SMALLER CITIES AND OTHER
CITIES AND THEY WERE THE BEST.
SO YOU GUYS ARE ALL INVITED TO
A REALLY FUN HOPEFULLY SOFT
OPENING THIS SUNDAY FROM THREE
TO EIGHT.
BRING YOUR FRIENDS, BRING YOUR
FAMILY COME AND HAVE A BLAST
SHOULD AND WE MAY OR MAY NOT
MAKE IT BUT IT WON'T BE THEIR
FAULT.
IT'LL BE OUR FAULT.
SO IF WE DON'T MAKE IT WE'LL
LET YOU KNOW.
BUT
COME ON, HAVE SOME FUN.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JEREMY
HEALEY.
GOOD EVENING, MAYOR COUNCIL
CHAIRMAN IPSI TOWNSHIP.
OH I JUST LIKE TO ASK YOU IF
YOU GO HOME AND THINK ABOUT IT
AND ASK YOUR SIGNIFICANT LOVED
ONE THERE'S ONE QUESTION THAT
YOU LIKE TO CHANGE HOW YOU KIND
OF DO YOUR FINANCES YOU LIKE
FROM NOW ON ONCE YOU GET A
PAYCHECK YOU HAVE THIRTY DAYS
TO SPEND ALL THAT PAYCHECK AND
KEEP ALL THE RECEIPTS IF YOU
DON'T SPEND ALL THAT PAYCHECK
YOU LOSE WHATEVER LEFT AND NEXT
PAYCHECK GETS GARNISHED FOR
THAT SAME AMOUNT THEY'D
PROBABLY LOOK AT YOU AND IF
THEY DID DO THIS, WHAT'S THE
RESULT OF SUCH SPENDING IF YOU
JUST CONTINUOUSLY JUST
EVERYTHING IS YOU'VE GOT IT YOU
AND IF YOU HAD KIDS AROUND
DON'T HAVE THIS CONVERSATION
BECAUSE THEY LIKE THIS ONE YOU
WIND UP WITH A LOT OF BUNCH
OF USELESS THINGS AND A SHORT
AMOUNT OF TIME SPENDING IN SUCH
WAYS.
THIS IS INTERESTING HOW THE
GOVERNMENT SPENDS MONEY.
I KNOW THIS FOR A FACT SO I WAS
FIRED.
I DON'T WANT TO TRY TO GO TO
THAT BOARD MEETING IN 2007
SEVEN YOU SEE TALK ABOUT THE
SPEND IT OR LOSE IT POLICY
THAT'S UNOFFICIAL BUT IT'S
THERE AND I KNOW IT STILL
EXISTS TODAY BECAUSE OF THE
PAST RECENT BOARD MEETING AT
DOBEK WHERE I WAS TALKING ABOUT
SUCH SPENDING REVENUE AND LADY
FROM THE FIRM BASIC COME UP AND
SHOW THE CHART OF REVENUE TO
EXPENDITURE AND SHE LOOKED AT
IT AND AND SAID RAISE YOUR
HANDS.
YOU KNOW WHEN REVENUES GO UP
EXPENDITURES GO UP AND LAUGHED.
I DIDN'T FIND IT TOO FUNNY AT
ALL BECAUSE THAT'S OUR TAX
MONEY BEING SPENT LIKE THAT.
AND SHE WENT ON TO EXPLAIN THAT
THEY'RE THERE NOT TO LOOK INTO
WHAT YOU SPEND IT ON.
THEY ARE ONLY LOOK INTO THAT
YOU MAKE SURE YOU SPEND IT ALL
AND THE AMOUNTS EQUAL OUT AT
THE END SO THERE IS NO CHECK
FOR FRAUD IN THERE AT ALL.
>> THAT'S ALL WITHIN THE
GOVERNMENT.
THERE IS NO OUTSIDE CHECK
BECAUSE THEY DO NOT CARE WHAT'S
IN THOSE BOOKS OTHER THAN THE
RECEIPT HIT THE BOTTOM ALL ADDS
UP TO THEIR REVENUES EQUALS
EXPENDITURES ALL THE TIME AND
IT'S DUE TO A BALANCED BUDGET
ACT THAT NEEDS TO BE REFORMED
BECAUSE AS LONG AS GOVERNMENTS
KEEP DOING THIS IT'S LIKE I
SAID IT'S AN ESCALATOR GOING
UP.
YOU NEVER GO DOWN AND THE PRICE
THE COST OF LIVING GOES UP WITH
THAT INCREASE EVERY TIME AS AS
YOU LOOK AT IF YOU LIKE, YOU
GOT TO INCREASE THIS YEAR.
WHAT DOES THAT GOING TO BE
SPENT ON?
HOW ABOUT JUST PUT THAT IN
RESERVE FUND OR LOWER TAXES
WITH IT?
THERE'S OTHER THINGS THAT CAN
BE DONE.
YOUR VARIABLE RATE IS TAXES AND
AS LONG AS THINGS KEEP GOING UP
AND YOU KEEP MATCHING REVENUES
AND EXPENDITURES WILL NEVER GO
DOWN.
>> THANK THANK YOU.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL COUNCIL MERIDIEN
THANK YOU MAYOR.
AS I MENTIONED LAST MONTH I'M
EXCITED TO PARTNER WITH THE ANN
ARBOR DISTRICT LIBRARY TO BRING
FOLKS A SUMMER GAME
CODE THROUGHOUT OUR SUMMER
COUNCIL MEETINGS HERE.
AND SO WITH THE GAME HAVING
STARTED I WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THAT EVERYONE SAW TODAY'S THE
SUMMER GAME CODE FOR THE
NEIGHBORHOOD COUNCIL MEETING.
I BELIEVE FOR THOSE FOLKS AT
HOME IT WILL ALSO POP UP ON
YOUR SCREENS.
BUT I JUST WANTED TO THANK THE
NEIGHBOR DISTRICT LIBRARY FOR
AGAIN CREATING A REALLY FUN
ACTIVITY FOR REALLY FOLKS
OF ALL AGES HERE IN THE
COMMUNITY TO COME TOGETHER TO
CELEBRATE OUR INCREDIBLE
LIBRARIES TO GET IN OUR
LIBRARIES AND REALLY AROUND THE
COMMUNITY AND OF COURSE AS WE
CONTINUE TO HAVE A CODE HERE AT
THE BEGINNING OF EACH COUNCIL
MEETING, IT'S AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR FOLKS TO STAY ENGAGED,
TUNED INTO OUR COUNCIL MEETINGS
THROUGHOUT THE SUMMER AND IF
YOU COLLECT THEM ALL YOU WILL
EARN A BADGE SO I HOPE THAT
EVERYONE ENJOYS PLAYING COUNCIL
MEMBER IRA.
>> THANK YOU.
I JUST WANTED TO LET FOLKS KNOW
THAT COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN AND
I ARE GOING TO BE HOLDING A
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING REGARDING
THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
UPDATE FOR THE LOTEN
NEIGHBORHOOD ON JUNE 29TH AT
PITTSVILLE LIBRARY I THINK WE
DECIDED ON FOR FOUR TO SIX P.M.
MAYBE MAYOR TAYLOR WILL BE
THERE AS WELL.
COUNCIL BRITISH AND A MEMBER
OF OUR CITY PLANNING STAFF THIS
IS PART OF A SERIES OF OUTREACH
OPPORTUNITIES THAT WE HAVE BEEN
CONDUCTING IN RESPONSE REALLY
TO REQUESTS FROM VARIOUS
NEIGHBORHOODS THROUGHOUT THE
CITY.
SO IF YOU ARE SOMEONE WHO'S
WATCHING AND YOU'RE INTERESTED
IN SETTING SUCH A MEETING FOR
YOUR OWN NEIGHBORHOOD, REACH
OUT TO YOUR OWN COUNCIL MEMBERS
AND HOPEFULLY WE CAN GET THAT
GOING.
BUT THESE HAVE BEEN GREAT
OPPORTUNITIES FOR FOLKS TO COME
OUT, ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW
THE PROPOSED COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN MIGHT AFFECT THEIR
PARTICULAR NEIGHBORHOOD AND TO
GIVE THEIR FEEDBACK AND AND
THEIR THOUGHTS AND IDEAS
BECAUSE WE ARE STILL VERY MUCH
IN THE ENGAGEMENT PROCESS
OF CREATING THE PLAN FOR
REVISING IT, GETTING FEEDBACK
FROM THE COMMUNITY AND YOUR
VOICE IS IMPORTANT AND WE WANT
TO HEAR FROM YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNHILL
.
>> SO FUN TO HEAR ABOUT HOW THE
LIBRARY DOES SUCH A GREAT JOB
WITH ACTIVATION WHICH LEADS ME
INTO MY COMMENTS THIS WEEKEND
ON SATURDAY IS MAKE MUSIC DAY
IN ANN ARBOR AND THE URL FOR
THAT THIS IS IN OUR DISTRICT
LIBRARY PROGRAM.
IT'S ADELGID MAKE MUSIC PRETTY
EXCITED TO SAY THAT STARTING AT
THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY AT 10 A.M.
WHICH IS IN WARD FIVE GOING
UNTIL SIX THIRTY PM THERE ARE
BANDS PLAYING ALL DAY AT THE
WESTGATE BRANCH WHICH IS ALSO
ONE WORD FIVE STARTING AT NOON
GOING SIX PM THERE'S BANDS AND
MUSIC MUSIC PERFORMERS THERE AS
WELL AND CHECK THEM OUT.
THERE'S A LINK RIGHT ON THAT
WEBSITE ADELGID MAKE MUSIC
WHERE YOU CAN SEE WHERE ALL
OF MANY OF US IN OUR COMMUNITY
ARE HOSTING BANDS AND
PERFORMERS ON OUR PORCHES AND
OUR LAWNS AND OUR BACKYARDS
TRULY A CELEBRATION OF MUSIC IN
TOWN AND IN CELEBRATION OF ART
IN A WAY THAT ENGAGES OUR
COMMUNITY, BRINGS PEOPLE
DOWNTOWN, GETS OUR
NEIGHBORHOODS ACTIVATED.
IT'S A LOT OF FUN.
ALL OF IT IS FREE.
>> ANYONE AND ANYONE WHO
HAPPENS TO BE NORTHWEST
WASHINGTON FROM BETWEEN 12 AND
NOON ON SATURDAY IS WELCOME TO
COME BY AND HEAR A FOLK BAND ON
MY PORCH AND YOU'LL I'M SURE
ENCOUNTER MANY OTHER CONCERTS
THROUGHOUT WHICH IS A GREAT WAY
FOR US TO CELEBRATE MUSIC, THE
ARTS AND OUR COMMUNITY AND I
HOPE EVERYONE WILL TAKE TIME TO
CHECK IT OUT.
THERE ARE ALSO PERFORMANCES ALL
THROUGHOUT MAIN STREET JUST AS
A REMINDER RIGHT NOW IS OUR
SUMMER STREET PROGRAMS.
>> OUR STREETS ARE CLOSED FROM
THURSDAY MORNINGS THROUGH
SUNDAY EVENING'S MAIN STREET IS
CLOSED AS IS LIBERTY STREET
BETWEEN WILLIAM AND I'M SORRY
ASHLEY AND 5TH AND THE SAME FOR
WASHINGTON AS WELL.
SO I HOPE THAT YOU'RE ENJOYING
IT.
IT WAS REALLY EXCITING TO BE
DOWNTOWN THIS WEEKEND AND SEE
SO MANY PEOPLE OUTSIDE AND THIS
IS JUST A GREAT WAY LIBRARIES
CONTRIBUTING TO WHAT MAKES ANN
ARBOR SUCH A COOL PLACE TO HANG
OUT.
>> SO I HOPE TO SEE YOU OUT
THERE SOMEWHERE.
HARRISON THANK YOU, MAYOR.
AS WE APPROACH JUNETEENTH, I'D
LIKE TO SPEAK TO A PART OF OUR
LOCAL HISTORY THAT RESURFACED
RECENTLY THAT SPEAKS DIRECTLY
TO THE KIND OF WORK WE MUST
STILL DO AROUND TRUTHTELLING
AND REPAIR.
>> AND IN ARTICLE THAT WAS
PUBLISHED TODAY AND A
FORTHCOMING DOCUMENTARY HOSTED
BY THE ANN ARBOR DISTRICT
LIBRARY RENEWED ATTENTION TO
THE DNA DRAGNET THAT TOOK PLACE
HERE IN ANN ARBOR THIRTY YEARS
AGO IN THE MID 90S THE CRIME
WAS THAT CRIME, THE CRIME THAT
PROMPTED THE INVESTIGATION WAS
HORRIFIC.
THE PURSUIT OF JUSTICE WAS
NECESSARY BUT WHAT FOLLOWED
WENT FAR BEYOND THAT PURSUIT
AND INFLICTED HARM ON AN ENTIRE
COMMUNITY.
MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
BLACK MEN MANY OF WHOM BEYOND
RACE DID NOT FIT THIS SUSPECT'S
DESCRIPTION OR STOPPED
QUESTIONED AND ASKED TO PROVIDE
DNA.
BOYS AND MEN WERE APPROACHED AT
HOME, AT WORK AND IN PUBLIC
UNDER PRESSURE TO COMPLY EVEN
WHEN BLACK MEN WERE CLEARED BY
DNA, MANY WERE FORCED TO CARRY
PAPERS PROVING THAT THEY HAD
BEEN EXONERATED PAPERS THAT
WOULD PRESENT THEY HAD TO
PRESENT WHEN STOPPED AGAIN AND
AGAIN AND AGAIN THAT WASN'T
NEW.
>> THIS COUNTRY HAS A LONG
HISTORY OF A CRIME REQUIRING
BLACK PEOPLE TO CARRY PROOF
OF THEIR RIGHT TO MOVE FREELY
FROM FREEDOM PAPERS TO DRIVER'S
LICENSES TO IN THIS CASE PROOF
THAT THEY WERE NOT GUILTY.
TO MAKE MATTERS WORSE, EVEN
AFTER THE ACTUAL PERPETRATOR
WAS APPREHENDED THROUGH
TRADITIONAL INVESTIGATION NOT
THROUGH THIS DRAGNET LAW
ENFORCEMENT REFUSED TO DESTROY
THE DNA PROFILES OF INNOCENT
MEN.
IT TOOK A COURT ORDER TO FORCE
THAT BASIC ACT OF RESPECT AND
JUSTICE.
THIS IS WHY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
MATTERS THE PUBLIC REMEMBRANCE
THE DISCUSSIONS NOW HAPPEN
HAPPENING THROUGH THIS
DOCUMENTARY THAT IS REPARATIVE
WORK.
IT IS NECESSARY BECAUSE PART
OF REPARATIONS IS TRUTH TELLING
IS TELLING THE TRUTH ABOUT WHAT
WAS DONE ABOUT THE WAY RACE NOT
JUSTICE SHAPED THE SCOPE
OF THIS INVESTIGATION ABOUT THE
WAY SYSTEMS DESIGNED TO PROTECT
BECAME TOOLS OF CONTROL AND
ABOUT THE FACT THAT IT WAS THIS
CITY THAT DID THIS NOT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT BUT AN
ITSELF
DURING JUNETEENTH WE
TALK ABOUT BLACK LIBERATION BUT
ALSO ABOUT THE UNFINISHED WORK
OF MAKING THAT FREEDOM REAL
PART OF THAT WORK IS ENSURING
THAT EPISODES LIKE THE DNA
DRAGNET ARE NOT HIDDEN OR
SOFTENED BUT NAMED FOR WHAT
THEY WERE AND WHAT AND THAT WE
REMEMBER NOT JUST WHAT WAS DONE
TO WHOM AND WHY.
COUNCILMAN RIC'S THANKS NO
REFERENCE SOMETHING I DON'T
USUALLY UP HERE WHICH IS
ANNIVERSARIES AND GUIDE TO
FINANCE AND BUDGET JUST
ENCOURAGE FOLKS THAT ARE
INTERESTED IN OUR BUDGET
PROCESS TO CHECK OUT THAT PAGE.
IT'S GOT LOTS OF INFORMATION
ABOUT HOW THE CITY BUDGETS AND
I PROMISE IT'S A VERY SENSIBLE
APPROACH USING BEST PRACTICES
AND I KNOW FINANCE EXPERT
MYSELF BUT WE ARE CERTAINLY NOT
MATCHING OUR OUR REVENUE TO OUR
EXPENDITURE AS WE HAVE A HEFTY
FINE BALANCE THAT IS MEETING
THE REQUIRED AT LEAST MINIMUM
FIFTEEN PERCENT AND WE ARE ALSO
BUDGETING FOR THE FUTURE AS
WELL FOR FOUR MAJOR
EXPENDITURES.
SO SOMETIMES YOU SEE THAT IN
OUR IN OUR BUDGET AS WELL.
BUT IT'S A GREAT WEBSITE I DIG
IN EVERY YEAR AROUND BUDGET
TIME BUT ENCOURAGE FOLKS TO TO
LOOK IN AFTER BUDGET TO TO SEE
WHAT WE WE PASSED IN MAY
FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
COUNCIL
.
I LIKE TO RECOMMEND THE
FOLLOWING OR RATHER I'D LIKE TO
REQUEST THE CONFIRMATION THE
FOLLOWING APPOINTMENT THAT WAS
PRESENTED TO CITY COUNCIL ON
JUNE 2ND TWENTY TWENTY FIVE TO
THE END OF OUR TRANSPORTATION
AUTHORITY BOARD PER DENHA
RAMASWAMY EVEN BY COUNCIL
MEMBER CORDELL'S I HAVE MY
PRIOR DISCUSSION ON FABER POSED
IT'S PROVED LIKE I RECOMMEND
THE FOLLOWING NOMINATION FOR
YOUR CONSIDERATION OF THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION CORPORATION BOARD
TERESA MY BROTHER TRESA
NICHOLS' WE HAVE BEFORE US THE
CONSENT AGENDA.
I HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE CONCEPT AGENDA MOVE
BY COUNCILOR IA SECOND BY
COUNCILOR GHAZI ADMIN
DISCUSSION OF THE CONSENT
OF THE COUNCIL AND BRIAN THANK
YOU.
>> I JUST WANTED TO MAKE A
COMMENT ABOUT THE THREE AND FOR
THESE ARE THE RESOLUTIONS TO
APPROVE STREET CLOSINGS FOR THE
ELECTRICIANS ANTI BLOCK PARTY
AND FOR THE BLOCK PARTY AND I
WANTED TO OF COURSE I WE DO
THIS EVERY YEAR.
I DON'T EXPECT THIS TO BE
CONTROVERSIAL IN ANY WAY.
>> BUT I DID JUST WANT TO NOTE
WHAT AN ABSOLUTE HONOR AND
PRIVILEGE IT IS THAT ANN ARBOR
IS THE CHOSEN LOCATION FOR THE
UNITED ASSOCIATION OF PLUMBERS
AND PIPEFITTERS FOR THE IBEW,
THE INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD
OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS AND THEN
ALSO FOR THE IRONWORKERS TO
COME TO ANN ARBOR TO BRING ALL
OF THEIR INSTRUCTORS FROM ALL
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
SO THE PEOPLE WHO TEACH THE
NEXT GENERATION OF ELECTRICIANS
AND PLUMBERS AND IRON WORKERS,
THEY ALL COME HERE TO ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN TO SPEND A WEEK
AT WCC LEARNING HOW TO BE
BETTER INSTRUCTORS, LEARNING
THE LATEST TECHNOLOGY AND AND
IN TEACHING THE NEXT GENERATION
OF THESE TRADES WHICH ARE SO
VITAL AND SO NECESSARY
ESPECIALLY RIGHT NOW AS
BUILDING IS HAPPENING AND WE
HAVE PEOPLE RETIRING AND WE
NEED NEW APPRENTICES INTO THESE
INTO THESE CAREERS.
SO HERE IN ANN ARBOR WE
RECOGNIZED THE VALUE OF THESE
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS.
THAT'S WHY WE SPECIFICALLY WHEN
WE ARE HIRING FOR CONSTRUCTION
OF CITY PROJECTS WE PRIORITIZE
CONTRACTORS WHO PUT THEIR
APPRENTICES THROUGH THESE
SPECIFIC PROGRAMS AND ONES LIKE
THESE AND SO WE'RE LUCKY TO
HAVE THEM COME HERE.
AND I JUST WANTED TO MAKE A
QUICK NOTE OF THE VALUE THAT
THEY BRING DESTINATION ANN
ARBOR HAS ESTIMATED THAT THESE
THREE PROGRAMS GENERATE TWENTY
THREE MILLION DOLLARS IN
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY OVER THE
THREE WEEKS THAT THAT THEIR
FOLKS COME HERE TO ANN ARBOR.
SO APPRECIATE THESE
ORGANIZATIONS CHOOSING OUR TOWN
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO ATTENDING
THESE BLOCK PARTIES AND
CELEBRATING WITH THEM FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE BECAUSE
OF THE JOHN KASMIR AKMAN LIKE
EPOLICY TWENTY ONE PLEASE KATHY
MCCONNELL, THANK THANK YOU FOR
YOUR COMMENTS COUNCIL MEMBER
HERE IT'S IT DOES HAVE A
TREMENDOUS IMPACT DOWNTOWN TO
BRING THESE CONFERENCES AND
GROUPS HERE.
I JUST WANTED TO SAY I WAS
EXCITED TO SEE THE SERVICES
CONTRACT FOR THE THRONE BEING
RENEWED HAVING PUBLIC RESTROOMS
IN OUR DOWNTOWN HAS BEEN
ENTIRELY POSITIVE IMPACT ON OUR
DOWNTOWN.
>> WE'VE SEEN IT.
I THINK SOME OF THE FEARS THAT
WE HAD AROUND WHAT IMPACT IT
MIGHT HAVE IT COULD POTENTIALLY
BE NEGATIVE HAS NONE OF THAT
HAS PROVEN TO BE TRUE.
WE KNOW THAT PUBLIC RESTROOMS
THEY INCREASE AND REALLY
PROVIDE FOR DIGNITY AND
INCLUSIVELY AND WALKABILITY AND
GETTING PEOPLE OUT OF THEIR
CARS AND ONTO THE STREETS
DOWNTOWN.
SO I'M EXCITED TO SEE THIS AND
I HOPE THAT MY COLLEAGUES WILL
JOIN ME IN SUPPORTING IT.
IT HAS A POSITIVE IMPACT ON OUR
MAIN STREET AREA.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION ALL IN
FAVOR CONCEPT WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF CIACCIA 21
WALPOLE'S THE CONSENT AGENDA
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF TWENTY
ONE IS APPROVED BY THE COUNCIL
MEMBERS PRESENT ALL VOTE IN THE
AFFIRMATIVE THAT SATISFIED THE
EIGHT VOTE REQUIREMENT WITH
RESPECT TO SIX SEVEN
AND THE
TWENTY TO TWENTY ONE RESOLUTION
TO APPROVE RENEWAL AND
AMENDMENT NUMBER ONE THE
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT
WITH PFM GROUP CONSULTING LLC
FOR DEVELOPMENT ECONOMIC AND
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS MOVI COUNCIL
MEMBER ACKMANN SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG'S
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF 21 COUNCIL
MEMBER OK THANK YOU SO JUST TO
HIGHLIGHT THE PURPOSE OF THIS
INCREASE IS TO CONTINUE THE
FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
THAT'S RELATED TO THE ARBER.
S DEVELOPMENT AFTER CITY
COUNCIL PASSED A RESOLUTION IN
APRIL RELATED TO AUTHORIZING
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO
NEGOTIATE CITY PARTICIPATION IN
THE PROJECT INCLUDING OWNING,
OPERATING AND FIGHTING FOR
PARKING DECKS.
I VOTED AGAINST THAT RESOLUTION
AND I REMAIN CONCERNED ABOUT
THE DIRECTION THAT IT SETS FOR
THE CITY'S PARTICIPATION IN
DEVELOPMENT OF OUR TRANSIT
CORRIDORS.
OF COURSE I VALUE THE
IMPORTANCE OF THOROUGH ANALYSIS
BUT I WON'T SUPPORT CONTINUED
EFFORTS FOR THIS WITHOUT
ADVANCING OUR TRANSPORTATION
GOALS.
>> I'VE HIGHLIGHTED MY
TRANSPORTATION CONCERNS BEFORE
BUT I GUESS I WANTED TO FOCUS
MY COMMENTS TONIGHT A BIT MORE
ON INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE AREA
WRIT LARGE.
SO AS A REMINDER IN BROAD
STROKES WE WOULD BE USING A
TURF WHICH IS A MECHANISM THAT
USES TAXES ON FUTURE GAINS IN
THE REAL ESTATE VALUE TO PAY
FOR INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
AND IN WHAT'S BEING PROPOSED SO
FAR THIS IS TO PAY FOR FOR
PARKING GARAGES.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE HAVE
INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS IN THAT
AREA SO WE ZONE TO TAKE ONE.
WE OF COURSE WANT TO SEE
DEVELOPMENT OF HOUSING HERE.
I SHARE THAT DESIRE.
WE'VE GOT HOUSING GOING IN AT
BRIARWOOD.
THAT'S GREAT.
WE'VE GOT THIS AMBITIOUS
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL HERSELF TO
ADD MUCH NEEDED HOUSING.
WE KNOW THAT INFRASTRUCTURE
DEMANDS ON THIS AREA ARE GOING
TO BE MORE INTENSE THAN THEY
HAVE BEEN TO DATE WHICH IN AND
OF ITSELF DOES NOT CONCERN ME.
HOWEVER, IT DOES CONCERN ME IS
THAT WHAT IS BEING PROPOSED IS
FOR THE CITY TO PARTICIPATE IN
THE PROJECT BY BUILDING PARKING
GARAGES THAT WILL WIND UP
HOOVERING UP THE ADDITIONAL TAX
REVENUE TO PAY OFF THESE
GARAGES FOR THE NEXT THREE
YEARS.
SO MY QUESTION AND MY CONCERN
IS HOW ARE WE PLANNING TO FUND
OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
IN THE AREA IF THERE'S A PLAN
FOR THAT, I'D LOVE TO SEE IT.
BUT AS OF I HAVE NOT AND SO
I'LL BE VOTING AGAINST THIS
FURTHER DISCUSSION OF 21 ROLL
CALL THOUGH PLEASE START WITH
COUNCILMAN BRATMAN.
>> NO BRACKMAN NO NO BRIGG'S
NOW MARCANO NOW SMARTISH.
YES.
CUSTOMER YES.
THAT'S CUSTOMER WATSON YES.
CUSTOMER YES CUSTOMER DENHA
YES.
CUSTOMER GOSIA YES.
YES THAT'S RIGHT.
YES.
WASHINGTON WE NOW COME TO A SET
OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCILS IN THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
THE SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER
OF A PUBLIC HEARING TO SPEAK A
PUBLIC HEARING ONE NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BUT
YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO THE
SUBJECT MATTER OF THE PUBLIC
HEARING THAT IS TO SAY THE
SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE AGENDA TO
WHICH A PUBLIC HEARING TO WHICH
THAT PUBLIC HEARING RELATES TO
SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES BOTH
IN HOUSE AND ONLINE WILL HAVE
THREE MINUTES IN WHICH TO
SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING AND
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED,
PLEASE CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS
AND CEDE THE FLOOR.
OUR FIRST PUBLIC HEARING TODAY
IS PUBLIC HEARING NUMBER ONE AN
ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION FIVE
UP TO NINE NINE BE OF CHAPTER
55 UNIT FIVE DEVELOPMENT
CODE OF TITLE FIVE OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY BANABA.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING NOW WE DO HAVE
SOMEONE ONLINE CALL HER THE
PHONE NUMBER FOR ONE AND THEN
FOR ONE MORE STARTED COMING
HERE
.
>> GO AHEAD.
>> OH, THANK YOU.
CALL THIS IS JUST MORE I AM
NERVOUS BE POPPING ABOUT THE
LONG DIVISION PUBLIC HEARING
REQUIREMENT.
STOP ME IF YOU'RE NOT I THINK
I'VE ACTIVATED AGENDA
CORRECTLY.
WE'RE ALL GOOD.
I JUST WANTED TO SAY THANK YOU
MA'AM ANYWAY I JUST WANTED TO
SAY JUST VERY QUICKLY.
YES MA'AM.
DIVISIONS ARE KIND OF TIGHT IN
TERMS OF WHAT LEEWAY THE CITY
HAS IN TERMS OF MAKING A
DECISIONS REGARDING IT.
>> BUT WE TRAIN THE PUBLIC THIS
RELATES TO OTHER PUBLIC
HEARING.
I WILL TRY NOT TO WORK TOO MUCH
ON THE OTHER BUT IT SEEMS TO BE
MOVING IN A DIRECTION OF LESS
OF OUR PARTICIPATION.
EVEN IN THE CASE OF LAND
DIVISION THERE ARE CERTAIN
ISSUES REGARDING WHY A PARCEL
HASN'T BEEN BEEN DIVIDED.
THE CONSIDERATIONS THAT
NEIGHBORS MAY HAVE AND
INTERESTED MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC MAY HAVE THAT THE CITY
MAY NOT BE AWARE OF WAS REALLY,
REALLY IMPORTANT THAT WE
CONSIDER THAT WE KEEP PUBLIC
EMPLOYEE AND AS MUCH AS
POSSIBLE THIS HAS BEEN AN
OVERALL TREND FOR THE COUNCIL
AND I KNOW YOU FOUND YOURSELVES
PROGRESSIVE AND THANK TO BE
PROGRESSIVE I THINK ON A
NATIONAL AND STATE LEVEL.
BUT LOCALLY THIS IS A
PROGRESSIVE.
IT NEEDS TO BE A SITUATION
WHERE IN A COMMUNITY SUCH AS AN
AVERAGE AND IN TERMS
OF COMMUNITY SUCH AS ANN ARBOR
WE HAVE GREAT PEOPLE WITH THE
ABILITY PROVIDE INPUT BUT THAT
ABC STAFF CAN USE AS A
RESOURCE.
I THINK IT IS IMPORTANT TO
CONTINUE THAT IMPORTANCE.
I THINK IT HAS TO HAPPEN HERE
AT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
LEVEL WE NEED OTHER REPORT
OF THE COMMISSION'S REVENUE ALL
HAVING TO DO IT AT COUNCIL OR
IF YOU GUYS ARE IF YOU GUYS ARE
DOING DILIGENCE WHICH YOU
SHOULD BE DOING OTHER THINGS ON
THE AGENDA, I WOULD SAY THAT
WHATEVER CHANGES THAT YOU MAKE
MAKE SURE THAT WHOEVER
PARTICIPATES HAS INPUT AND THEY
HAVE A TOP DOWN PROCESS.
I THINK THAT'S WHERE WE'RE
MOVING THESE DAYS AND THAT'S
NOT A GOOD THING AT ANY RATE,
THANK YOU FOR CONSIDERING MY
REMARKS.
THANK YOU
TO ANY OTHER CALLERS.
SIRAH
.
SEE IN THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS
CLOSED PUBLIC HEARING NO TO AN
AUDIENCE TO END SECTIONS EIGHT
FIVE THREE THREE THROUGH EIGHT
FIVE FOUR ZERO TO CHAPTER ONE
ZERO FIVE HOUSING CODE HAVE
TITLE NOT PART OF MY TITLE
EIGHT BUILDING REGULATIONS
OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR GREEN RENTAL HOUSING.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING FOLKS JUST COME
COME ON UP AS YOU WILL.
I'M SORRY I'M GOING TO GO FIRST
TARGET.
GOOD EVENING, MR. MAYOR.
COUNCIL MEMBERS MY NAME IS
MICHAEL RYAN.
I COME HERE TONIGHT AS A
LANDLORD A REAL ESTATE
PROFESSIONAL AND MOST
IMPORTANTLY IN ANN ARBOR RIGHT
OF OVER THIRTY YEARS.
LET ME BEGIN BY SAYING THAT I
SHARE YOUR VISION THAT A LOCAL
GOVERNMENT HAS THE OPPORTUNITY
IF NOT THE RESPONSIBILITY TO
CREATE AND IMPLEMENT POLICIES
THAT IMPROVE THE LIFE AND
ENJOYMENT OF ITS CITIZENS.
I BELIEVE IT IS THESE VERY
VALUES THAT MAKE ANN ARBOR A
PLACE FOR SO MANY PEOPLE WANT
TO LIVE.
I'M NOT HERE TONIGHT TO CHANGE
YOUR MINDS ABOUT VOTING FOR
THIS ORDINANCE.
I GAVE UP THAT CONCEPT
OF CHANGING MINDS WHEN I GOT
MARRIED.
I'M HERE TO IMPLORE YOU TO
IMPLEMENT THE SAME STRATEGIES
THAT MADE THE SIMILAR PROGRAM
SUCCESSFUL IN BOULDER, COLORADO
THE VERY PLAN THAT INSPIRED
THIS ORDINANCE AS LANDLORDS WE
STRIVE TO CREATE LIVING
SITUATIONS THAT WE ARE PROUD
OF , PLACES THAT WE WOULD LIKE
TO LIVE OURSELVES.
WE RECENTLY PURCHASED THE
DUPLEX GOT RENOVATED IT AND HAD
THE CITY INSPECTION WHICH WE
PASSED ON THE FIRST INSPECTION
.
BASED ON THAT WE THOUGHT WE
WOULDN'T HAVE ANY TROUBLE AT
ALL ACHIEVING THE STANDARDS THE
GREEN RENTAL ORDINANCE.
UNFORTUNATELY WHEN WE DID THE
CHECKLIST WE COULD HARDLY REACH
THE 70 POINTS BY FAR NOT
GETTING THE ONE HUNDRED AND TEN
POINTS THAT WE NEEDED WHEN WE
PRINTED OUT THE SMART REGS
CHECKLIST THAT THE BOULDER
COLORADO PROGRAM TO SEE HOW OUR
PROPERTIES WOULD FARE THE
BOULDER THRESHOLD IS ONE
HUNDRED POINTS AND WE SCORED
PRETTY CLOSE TO THAT IN THE
NINETIES WE FOUND THAT THE
REGULATIONS WERE FAR MORE
DETAILED AND THEY DIRECTLY
CORRELATED TO ENERGY EFFICIENCY
REGARDING I HAVE SOME EXAMPLES
REGARDING ATTIC INSULATION THE
BOULDER ORDINANCE REQUIRED ON R
RATING OF NINETEEN AND GAVE
HOMEOWNERS TWENTY FOUR POINTS.
THIS ORDINANCE REQUIRES AN R
RATING OF FIFTY BUT GIVES YOU
ONLY NINE POINTS JUST FOR
REFERENCE NEW CONSTRUCTION
HOMES RECEIVE A RATING OF R
THIRTY EIGHT AND ARE DEEMED
VERY ENERGY EFFICIENT.
THE BUILDER MARK REX ALSO HAS
AN EFFICIENCY PERCENTAGE FOR
THE HVAC SYSTEM ANDT'S BASED
ON THE EFFICIENCY OF THOSE
SYSTEMS AND THE POINTS ARE
THIRTEEN TO FORTY THREE POINTS
WHEREAS THIS GREEN PROGRAM
GIVES NO POINTS FOR GUESTS
FORCE TO AIR FURNACES OR AC NO
MATTER THE EFFICIENCY RATE, THE
SMART REGS ALSO HAVE SPECIFIC
YOU FACTORS WHEN IT COMES TO
WINDOWS GIVING POINTS OF TWO TO
FOURTEEN TO BEING THE ORIGINAL
SINGLE PANE WINDOWS AND WHICH
YOU TYPICALLY FINDING ALL BY
SIDE AND BURNS PARK.
THE GREEN PROGRAM GIVES FOUR
POINTS FOR ENERGY STAR RATED
WINDOWS.
WE SPEND TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS ON NEW WINDOWS IN THIS
DUPLEX AND WE ONLY GET FOUR
POINTS FOR IT.
IN SUMMARY WE ENCOURAGE THIS
COUNCIL AND THE COMMITTEE
FOLLOWING UP ON THIS VOTE WHO
WILL BE ADDRESSING THIS
ORDINANCE TO RECONSIDER THE
POINT SYSTEM.
WE FEEL THAT BEING MORE
SPECIFIC AND IN CONCLUDING A
WIDER RANGE OF EFFICIENCY
LEVELS AND POINTS PLEASE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> MEANING MY NAME IS NANCY
BAUER BANK.
I'M A RESIDENT OF WARD TWO.
I'VE BEEN A RESIDENT VANOVER
FOR ABOUT SIXTY THREE YEARS.
I HAVE BEEN IN THE REAL ESTATE
PROFESSION FOR ABOUT TWENTY
EIGHT YEARS.
LIKE THE PERSON BEFORE ME I I
BELIEVE THAT THE GREEN RENTAL
ORDINANCE IN THEORY IS GREAT.
I'M ALL FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND FOR MAKING OUR PROPERTIES
AND OUR POPULATION MORE
RESILIENT.
I CONCERNED ABOUT THE TIMELINE
FOR COMPLIANCE, THE COMPLEXITY
OF THE SCORING AND I WOULD ASK
THE COUNCIL TO RECONSIDER THE
TIMELINE FOR COMPLIANCE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HELLO I'M TRACY ROSE.
I AM A REALTOR IN ANN ARBOR.
I'VE BEEN A REALTOR FOR THIRTY
FIVE YEARS.
I ALSO AM A BUSINESS INVESTOR
IN A STATE STREET BUSINESS SO I
AM VERY INVOLVED IN THE
COMMUNITY.
LIKE NANCY JUST SAID BEFORE ME
I AM VERY CONCERNED ABOUT THE
TIMELINE FOR IMPLEMENTING ALL
OF THESE CHANGES.
LANDLORDS TYPICALLY HAVE A HAVE
A A LONG TERM PLAN.
YOU KNOW THEY'RE GOING TO
REPLACE THEIR VACANCIES COMES
IN FIVE YEARS WINDOWS AND TEN
BY IMPLEMENTING THIS AGGRESSIVE
TIMELINE OF THIS ORDINANCE IT
REALLY IS GOING TO CAUSE UNDUE
BURDEN FOR WELL-MEANING
LANDLORDS WHO TRY TO KEEP THEIR
PROPERTIES IN GOOD CONDITION
AND NICE PLACES FOR THEIR
TENANTS TO LIVE.
I KNOW MANY LANDLORDS AND I
KNOW MANY OF THEM REALLY TRY TO
PROVIDE GOOD HOUSING.
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN IS IF
THEY HAVE TO IMPLEMENT THESE
CHANGES SOONER THAN THEY HAVE
BUDGETED FOR, YOU KNOW THAT'S
GOING TO CAUSE HARDSHIP.
I'M ALSO A NOTARY.
I NOTARIZED SOME CLOSING
DOCUMENTS FOR LANDLORDS WHO
HAVE ALREADY STARTED SELLING
OFF PROPERTIES IN ANTICIPATION
OF THIS COMING IN SO THEY WOULD
LIKE TO SELL THEIR PROPERTIES
OFTEN TO OWNER OCCUPIED PEOPLE
WHO ARE GOING TO LIVE THERE AND
TAKE THEM OUT OF THE RENTAL
INVENTORY.
ALSO THIS WILL DIRECTLY AFFECT
THE RENTS.
IT'S HEARTBREAKING BECAUSE I
RECEIVE CALLS ALL THE TIME.
I'M VERY PRO RENTER FROM PEOPLE
WHOSE SITUATION HAS CHANGED.
THEY NEED A RENTAL NOW AND
THEY'VE BEEN A HOMEOWNER AND I
SAY WELL WHAT'S YOUR BUDGET?
AND THE THESE PEOPLE WILL SAY
OH I CAN GO THIRTEEN HUNDRED
DOLLARS AND YOU KNOW, I JUST TO
TELL THEM THAT THEIR OPTIONS
ARE VERY LIMITED SO IF THIS
ORDINANCE PASSES THE WAY THAT
IT'S WRITTEN, I REALLY FEEL
THIS IS GOING TO HAVE A DIRECT
IMPACT, A NEGATIVE IMPACT ON
THE RENTAL PROPERTIES IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
GOOD ME MY NAME'S ANGIE
RASMUSSEN.
I'M LONG TIME IN NURSERY
LIFETIME AND OUR RESIDENT AND I
CURRENTLY LIVE IN WARD FIVE.
I DID A TAKE THE CHECKLIST AND
APPLY IT TO FORTY AND THAT
FORTY THREE BUT I HAVE FORTY
THREE PROPERTIES IN THE CITY
AND THAT I MANAGE AND EVEN AT
MY OWN HOUSE I BARELY GET TO
FIFTY WITH THE MAJORITY OF THEM
AND SO I THINK AS PER THE OTHER
PEOPLE I THINK THE IDEA OF THIS
IS A GREAT IDEA.
I JUST THINK IMPLEMENTING THIS
QUICKLY WITH THIS GRADING
SYSTEM MAY BE A LITTLE TOO
QUICK AND I DO KNOW THAT A LOT
OF MY LANDLORDS WORK REALLY
HARD TO KEEP RENTS DOWN BUT I
JUST DON'T THINK THEY'RE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO DO THAT WITH
THESE KIND OF EXPENDITURES.
AND I HATE LIKE TRACEY IS
SAYING TOO I'VE SEEN A LOT
OF MY OWNERS SELL BECAUSE THEY
JUST CAN'T HANDLE ONE MORE
CHANGE OR ONE MORE COST TO THEM
JUST TO COMPLY WITH SOMETHING.
SO THANK YOU FOR
GOOD EVENING.
>> I'M JUDY MACDONALD.
I'M A PROPERTY MANAGER WITH THE
RHINEHART REALTORS AND I'M HERE
TONIGHT
.
I'M SPEAKING ON BEHALF OF MANY
OF MY CLIENTS, MOST
OF OUR
SMALL INDEPENDENT RENTAL
PROPERTY OWNERS OF SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES AND CONDOS.
WE RECOGNIZE AND SUPPORT THE
GOALS OF THE GREEN RENTAL
HOUSING ORDINANCE, PARTICULARLY
THE PUSH TOWARDS MORE
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY EFFICIENT
HOUSING.
THESE IMPROVEMENTS MATTER NOT
ONLY FOR THE ENVIRONMENT BUT
ALSO FOR THE HEALTH,
COMFORT AND WELL-BEING OF THE
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN THESE HOMES.
MANY OF US IN THE I WOULD SAY
SMALL HOUSING COMMUNITY
PROVIDER COMMUNITY WE SHARE THE
VALUES WE CARE ABOUT ARE
TENANTS AND WE WANT TO BE PART
OF THE SOLUTION THAT'S I WANT
TO URGE COUNCIL TO CONSIDER THE
REAL FINANCIAL AND LOGISTICAL
CONSTRAINTS THAT SMALL
PROPERTIES FACE UNLIKE LARGER
COMPANIES AND I HAVE MANAGED
LARGE APARTMENT COMPLEXES
MYSELF UNLIKE LARGER COMPANIES
WITH HUNDREDS OF UNITS, THESE
CLIENTS TYPICALLY OWN ONE, TWO
OR THREE SMALL UNITS SINGLE
FAMILY HOME, SMALL CONDO.
THAT'S IT.
THEY DON'T HAVE ACCESS TO THE
SAME FINANCING OPTIONS.
THEY CAN'T SPREAD OUT THEIR
COSTS ACROSS A LARGE PORTFOLIO
FOR THEM.
THEY'LL TELL YOU EVERY TIME
EVERY DOLLAR SPENT ON UPGRADES
HAS AN IMMEDIATE AND PERSONAL
IMPACT ON THEM.
THAT'S WHY A LONGER PHASED
TIMELINE FOR COMPLIANCE WOULD
MAKE A MEANINGFUL DIFFERENCE
WITH MORE TIME SMALL OWNERS
COULD NOT ONLY DIGEST BUT PLAN
AND BUDGET FOR UPGRADES LIKE
INSULATION APPLIANCE REPLACING
ENERGY AUDITS WITHOUT BEING
FORCED TO RAISE RENTS JUST TO
COVER A SUDDEN IN THEIR MIND
LARGE EXPENSE THIS FLEXIBILITY
IS KEY TO PRESERVING BOTH
SUSTAINABILITY AND
AFFORDABILITY.
MANY OF THESE OWNERS THAT BOTH
I AND SOME OF MY COLLEAGUES
HERE REPRESENT OUR LONG TERM
LANDLORDS WHO KEEP RENTS LOW OR
KEEP KEEP RENTS BELOW MARKET
JUST TO SUPPORT STABLE HOUSING.
BUT THAT'S THE SORRY BUT THAT
STABILITY BECOMES HARDER TO
MAINTAIN WHEN LARGE UPFRONT
COSTS ARE REQUIRED ALL AT ONCE
A LITTLE MORE FLEXIBILITY IN
TIMING OR A TIERED MAYBE A
TIERED ROLLOUT BASED ON
PROPERTY SIZE OR OWNER TYPE
COULD MEAN THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A PLANNED UPGRADE AND
AN EMERGENCY FINANCIAL STRAIN
FOR THEM.
MANY OF THEM I WILL.
I CAN TELL YOU THERE IMMEDIATE
REACTION TO THIS IS I'M JUST
GOING TO SELL I'M GOING TO SELL
.
THEREFORE I JUST WANT TO
ENCOURAGE COUNCIL TO KEEP THESE
DISTINCTIONS IN MIND AND MAYBE
CONSIDER SOME OTHER OPTIONS
THAT GIVE SMALL OWNERS THE TIME
AND SUPPORT THEY NEED TO MEET
THESE GOALS.
>> THANK YOU
.
HI, I'M KATHY JOHNSON.
I ALSO WORK FOR CHARLES FOR HER
COMPANY.
I HAVE BEEN A RESIDENT AND A
PROPERTY MANAGER FOR OVER 30
YEARS HERE IN THE CITY.
I DON'T THINK THAT ANY OF US
ARE REALLY AGAINST THE WHOLE
IDEA OF GOING GREEN.
I THINK THAT'S GREAT.
BUT I THINK OUR BIGGEST CONCERN
IS ARE THE COSTS THAT ARE
INVOLVED.
THE CITY IS REPORTEDLY
RECEIVING 30 MILLION IN FUNDING
FOR SUSTAINABILITY INITIATIVES.
MY QUESTION IS HOW MUCH OF THAT
FUNDING WILL BE ALLOCATED TO
HELP HOMEOWNERS COMPLY WITH
YOUR GUIDELINES OUTLINED IN THE
ORDINANCE IF YOUR GRANT FUNDING
FALLS THROUGH, DOES THAT MEAN
THAT YOU'RE NOT GOING TO YOU'LL
STILL MOVE FORWARD WITH
ENFORCING THE REQUIREMENTS
MEANING WHAT I'M TRYING TO SAY
IS THAT IF YOU'RE FUNDING GOES
THROUGH DOESN'T GO THROUGH, ARE
YOU GOING TO STILL CONTINUE
WITH YOUR PLANS?
I THINK THAT ONE THING IS TO
CONSIDER SOME KIND OF AN
INCENTIVE PROGRAM IF A
HOMEOWNER HAS TO SPEND A
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT MAYBE
THEY GET FIVE HUNDRED OFF THEIR
NEXT TAX BILL SOME KIND
OF INCENTIVE TO THESE
HOMEOWNERS BECAUSE I WILL
GUARANTEE YOU THAT IF THESE IF
THIS GOES THROUGH AND
HOMEOWNERS HAVE TO PUT
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS INTO THE
POINT SYSTEM, THE RENTAL RATES
ARE GOING TO INCREASE.
YOU WILL LOSE ALSO PEOPLE THAT
ARE RENTING THE PROPERTIES,
YOU'LL LOSE THEM BECAUSE IT'S
NOT GOING TO BE WORTH IT TO
THEM.
MANY OF THE OWNERS THAT I
MANAGE FOR I WOULD SAY PROBABLY
TWO THIRDS HAVE DECIDED TO
LEASE OUT THEIR HOME BECAUSE
THEY'VE TAKEN A JOB ELSEWHERE.
THEY DON'T WANT TO LOSE THEIR
HOME BECAUSE THEY'RE GOING TO
RETURN TO IT OR PERHAPS THEY'RE
AFRAID THAT OK, WHAT IF I'M
GIVING MY FAMILY TO ANOTHER
STATE?
THE JOB DOESN'T WORK OUT.
MY FAMILY'S UNHAPPY.
I WANT TO COME BACK IF THEY
SELL THEIR PROPERTY, THEY'RE
GOING TO SPEND SO MUCH MORE
RIGHT TO BUY SOMETHING IF THEY
RETURN TO ANN ARBOR.
SO I THINK THAT THE
REQUIREMENTS I THINK ALSO THEY
DON'T REALLY WORK FOR SINGLE
FAMILY HOMEOWNERS BUYING
TICKETS FOR TENANTS FOR BUS
TICKETS IF THEY ALREADY HAVE
TWO CARS THAT'S NOT GOING TO
SWAP DE COOKING CLASS
ELECTRONICS TAKE BACK.
THESE ARE ALL POINTS THAT
HOMEOWNERS SINGLE FAMILY OWNERS
WON'T BE ABLE TO TO USE CONDO
CONDO ASSOCIATIONS WAYS THEY
HAVE THEIR OWN RULES AND SUCH
AS SNOW REMOVAL, LANDSCAPING,
PEST MANAGEMENT, COMMUNITY
GARDENS.
THESE ARE ALL THINGS THAT
INDIVIDUAL HOMEOWNERS MAY NOT
BE ABLE TO OFFER TO GET THOSE
POINTS.
>> THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
COUNCIL.
MY NAME IS TODD WOLLAR.
I'M A REALTOR AND CO BROKER
WITH PROPERTIES CHRISTI'S
INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE RIGHT
AT MAIN STREET AND DEPOT UP
THERE ALSO CHAIR OF THE
MICHIGAN REALTOR MYSHKIN
REALTORS PUBLIC POLICY
COMMITTEE AND I APPRECIATE THE
CHANCE TO SPEAK WITH YOU THIS
EVENING.
I WANT TO SPEAK WITH YOU ABOUT
THE GREEN RENTAL HOUSING
ORDINANCE NOT FROM A PLACE
OF OPPOSITION TO ENVIRONMENTAL
GOALS BUT FROM A PLACE
OF PRACTICAL CONCERN FOR HOW
THIS WILL IMPACT RENTERS
PARTICULARLY DUE TO THE
EXTREMELY SHORT TIMELINE FOR
IMPLEMENTATION.
MOST PROPERTY OWNERS,
ESPECIALLY SMALL LOCAL
LANDLORDS AS YOU'VE HEARD
OPERATE ON LONG TERM
MAINTENANCE SCHEDULES.
YOU PLAN OUT CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS YEARS IN ADVANCE
BUDGETING CAREFULLY TO AVOID
MAJOR RENT INCREASES FOR
TENANTS.
THIS ORDINANCE UPENDS THAT THE
FINAL COMPLIANCE PHASE TAKES
EFFECT AFTER ONLY THREE YEARS,
WHICH IS ONLY A FRACTION OF THE
EXPECTED LIFE OF A MAJOR
HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE.
BUT I ALSO WANT TO DRAW
ATTENTION TO THE FIRST PHASE
OF COMPLIANCE COMPLIANCE PERIOD
ONE BEGINS JUST SIX MONTHS
AFTER ADOPTION.
SIX MONTHS IS SIMPLY NOT ENOUGH
TIME IS JUST SIX MONTHS.
YOU'RE EXPECTED TO FULLY
UNDERSTAND THE ORDINANCE,
ASSESS THE PROPERTY, DETERMINE
WHERE YOU FALL SHORT AND
COMPLETE UPGRADES MANY OF WHICH
ARE OLDER HOMES COMMON IN ANN
ARBOR WILL NOT BE MINOR EVEN
FOR LANDLORDS WHO MAY QUALIFY
FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
THAT SUPPORT IS NOT AUTOMATIC.
IT TAKES TIME TO RESEARCH
DIFFERENT PROGRAMS, FILL OUT
FORMS, SUBMIT DOCUMENTS AND
WAIT FOR APPROVAL.
MEANWHILE, THE COMPLIANCE
DEADLINE DOES NOT WAIT THE
RESULT PROPERTY OWNERS ARE
FORCED TO EITHER FRONT
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS OUT
OF POCKET ON SHORT NOTICE OR
DELAY COMPLIANCE AND RISK STEEP
FINES EITHER WAY THE COSTS GET
PASSED ON.
RENTS WILL GO UP NOT BECAUSE
LANDLORDS ARE GOUGING TENANTS
BUT BECAUSE THEY'RE SCRAMBLING
TO COMPLY WITH A FAST MOVING
COMPLICATED NEW MANDATE.
AND ARMS RENTAL HOUSING STOCK
IS FULL OF CHARACTER BUT ALSO
FULL OF AGE.
MANY ARE NOT MODERN BUILDINGS
THAT WILL EASILY PASS PHASE ONE
AND YET YOU'RE ASKING PEOPLE TO
ABSORB COSTS IMMEDIATELY WITH
LITTLE LEAD TIME AND WITHOUT A
CLEAR SUPPORT STRUCTURE IN
PLACE.
IF THE CITY WANTS THIS
ORDINANCE TO SUCCEED AND NOT
BECOME A DRIVER OF DISPLACEMENT
,IT MUST BUILD IN MORE TIME,
MORE TIME TO EDUCATE PROPERTY
OWNERS MORE TIME TO ACCESS
FINANCIAL HELP, MORE TIME TO
PLAN AND INVEST RESPONSIBLY.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS MCCALLAN GLENI I'VE
WORKED IN REAL ESTATE FOR ABOUT
THREE YEARS HELPING BUYERS AND
RENTERS FIND THEIR NEXT HOME IN
ANN ARBOR.
WHEN I'M HELPING A RENTER ALL
OF THEM HAVE THE SAME DREAM AND
THAT'S TO EVENTUALLY BUY IN ANN
ARBOR.
BUT EVERY YEAR THAT DREAM SLIPS
FURTHER AND FURTHER AWAY NOT
BECAUSE THEY'RE IRRESPONSIBLE
OR UNWILLING TO SAVE BUT
BECAUSE RENTS KEEP CLIMBING
FASTER THAN THE WAGES WHEN RENT
GOES UP.
THAT'S NOT JUST A HARDSHIP
TODAY.
THAT'S A DOWN PAYMENT THAT
DOESN'T GET SAVED AND THEREFORE
A FUTURE THAT NEVER GETS BUILT
.
THAT'S WHY I'M ASKING YOU TO BE
ABSOLUTELY SURE THAT THIS GREEN
RENTAL HOUSING ORDINANCE WON'T
RAISE RENTS BEFORE YOU VOTE IT
INTO LAW BECAUSE IF IT DOES
EVEN A LITTLE IT COULD HAVE
REAL LASTING CONSEQUENCES TO
THE PEOPLE TRYING TO BUILD A
LIFE HERE.
I'VE HEARD THE CITY STAFF AND
SEVERAL COUNCIL MEMBERS POINT
TO BOULDER, COLORADO AS PROOF
THAT THIS KIND OF ORDINANCE
WON'T RAISE RENTS.
BUT BOULDER IS NOT A MODEL WE
SHOULD RELY ON UNCRITICALLY.
BOULDER HAS SOME OF THE MOST
EXPENSIVE HOUSING STOCK IN THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY AND SAYS SINCE
PASSING THERE'S SIMILAR LAW
COSTS HAVE BEEN INCREASING
SIGNIFICANTLY FASTER THAN THE
REST OF THE COUNTRY.
IT'S NOT AN AFFORDABILITY
SUCCESS STORY.
IT'S A CAUTIONARY TALE.
ANN ARBOR ALSO HAS MUCH HIGHER
PERCENTAGE OF RENTAL HOUSING
THAN BOULDER, WHICH MEANS THE
SCALE OF IMPACT HERE COULD BE
MUCH GREATER.
WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT A SMALL
SEGMENT OF THE MARKET.
>> WE'RE TALKING ABOUT HOMES
WHERE THE MAJORITY OF THE
RESIDENTS LIVE.
IF LANDLORDS ARE HIT WITH STEEP
UPGRADE COSTS, MANY WILL PASS
THOSE COSTS ONTO THE RENTERS
AND NOT BECAUSE THEY'RE GREEDY
BUT BECAUSE THEIR MARGINS ARE
TIGHT AND THEY'RE OPERATING
ALREADY HIGH COST MARKET.
THAT COST SHIFT COULD PUT HOME
OWNERSHIP EVEN FURTHER OUT
OF REACH FOR THE THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE ALREADY TRYING TO
SAVE.
WE ALL WANT A GREENER FUTURE
LIKE MY COLLEAGUES HAVE SAID.
BUT WE NEED A FUTURE WHERE
PEOPLE CAN ALSO AFFORD TO LIVE
IN THE CITY THAT THEY WORK A
FUTURE WHERE PEOPLE CAN PLANT
ROOTS AND ACTUALLY RAISE A
FAMILY IN ANN ARBOR.
PLEASE DON'T PASS THIS
ORDINANCE WITHOUT TAKING A
SERIOUS LOOK AT HOW IT COULD
AFFECT RENT PRICES AND THEN BY
EXTENSION THE FUTURE OF THE
PEOPLE IN THE CITY.
>> THANK YOU.
>> HI, MY NAME IS AVIANA
ANDRADO MY FATHER AND I OWN AND
OPERATE A RENTAL PROPERTY IN
THE FOURTH WARD AND I'M HERE
TONIGHT TO VOICE MY OPPOSITION
TO THE GREEN RENTAL ORDINANCE
BECAUSE I OPPOSE ENERGY
EFFICIENCY BUT BECAUSE I
BELIEVE THIS ORDINANCE RISKS
DOING REAL HARM TO
SMALL
RESPONSIBLE PROPERTY OWNERS
LIKE MY FATHER AND MYSELF AND
ULTIMATELY TO THE TENANTS WE
SERVE.
MY DAD AND I ARE HANDS ON
LANDLORDS WHO TAKE CARE OF OUR
REPAIRS OURSELVES.
WE KNOW OUR TENANTS PERSONALLY.
WE RESPOND TO ANY ISSUES
QUICKLY AND WE WORK HARD TO
KEEP RENTS REASONABLE WHILE
MAINTAINING A SAFE, COMFORTABLE
HOME.
THIS IS NOT BIG BUSINESS FOR
US.
THIS IS A LONG TERM INVESTMENT
AND WE'VE POURED PERSONAL TIME
LABOR AND SAVINGS INTO IT.
THE ORDINANCE THAT'S WRITTEN
DOES NOT ACCOUNT FOR OWNERS
LIKE US.
THE ADDITIONAL COST
OF COMPLIANCE FROM ENERGY
ASSESSMENTS, MANDATED UPGRADES
AND ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS ARE
NOT IN SIGNIFICANT WHEN YOU OWN
JUST ONE PROPERTY AND UNLIKE
LARGE CORPORATE LANDLORDS WE
DON'T HAVE DOZENS OF HAND OR
HUNDREDS OF OTHER UNITS TO
SPREAD THE COST AROUND EVERY
DOLLAR WE HAVE TO SPEND ON
COMPLIANCE A DOLLAR THAT EITHER
COMES OUT OF OUR POCKETS OR
GETS PASSED ON TO THE TENANT.
I WANT TO EMPHASIZE WE ARE NOT
OPPOSED TO ENERGY EFFICIENCY.
WE'VE DONE IMPROVEMENTS OVER
THE YEARS BUT WE'VE DONE IT
THOUGHTFULLY ON A TIMELINE THAT
FITS BOTH OUR BUDGET AND OUR
TENANTS NEEDS.
THIS ORDINANCE WOULD FORCE US
INTO MAKING CHANGES ON A RIGID
SCHEDULE WITH REAL FINANCIAL
CONSEQUENCES.
THIS ORDINANCE ACTUALLY FAVORS
THE LARGE LANDLORDS WHO HAVE
THE SCALE AND RESOURCES TO
ABSORB THESE COSTS MUCH MORE
EASILY.
THIS COULD PUSH MORE SMALL
OWNERS LIKE US OUT OF THE
MARKET ENTIRELY FURTHER
CONCENTRATING ON RENTAL
OWNERSHIP IN THE HANDS OF LARGE
OUT OF TOWN COMPANIES THAT
DOESN'T HELP RENTERS THAT
DOESN'T HELP AFFORDABILITY.
THAT DOESN'T HELP THE DIVERSITY
OF OWNERSHIP IN OUR CITY.
I RESPECTFULLY ASK YOU TO
CONSIDER THE REAL WORLD IMPACT
BECAUSE WE HAVE NOT JUST THE
LANDLORDS LIKE ME AND MY
DAD BUT ALSO ON THE PEOPLE WHO
RENT FROM US.
WE ARE COMMITTED TO BEING
RESPONSIBLE PROPERTY OWNERS BUT
WE NEED A POLICY THAT SUPPORTS
THAT NOT ONE THAT MAKES IT
HARDER FOR FAMILIES LIKE US TO
CONTINUE OFFERING WELL
MAINTAINED AFFORDABLE HOUSING
IN ANN ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M EVELYN ROBERTS AND THE
BROKER AND OWNER OF NASDAQ
PROPERTY.
I MANAGE FIFTEEN PROPERTIES FOR
LOCAL MOM AND POP LANDLORDS AND
TONIGHT I WANT TO FOCUS ON THE
VERY REAL CONSEQUENCES FOR
RUSHING THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE GREEN RENTAL HOUSING
ORDINANCE ESPECIALLY FOR THOSE
MOM AND POP LANDLORDS AND THEY
MAKE UP A SIGNIFICANT PORTION
OF ANNENBERG'S RENTAL HOUSING
STOCK.
THIS ORDINANCE HAS NOT BEEN
WELL PUBLICIZED TO THE AVERAGE
PROPERTY OWNER.
MANY HAVE NO IDEA WHAT'S
HAPPENING SO MY BIGGEST CONCERN
IS WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE COMES
DUE AFTER THIS ORDINANCE PASSES
AS EARLY AS SIX MONTHS AND
THEY'RE JUST HEARING ABOUT IT.
THEY FAIL, THEY'RE OUT
OF COMPLIANCE AND THEY'RE BEING
FINED HUNDREDS OF DOLLARS A DAY
.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME THEY CAN'T
SELL THEIR PROPERTY TO ESCAPE
THE FINES BECAUSE THEY FOLLOW
THE PROPERTY.
NO NO NEW OWNER WANTS TO BUY
THAT PROPERTY BECAUSE IT'S A
BLACK HOLE.
THEY CAN'T VACATE THEIR TENANTS
TO DO THE WORK BECAUSE THEY
HAVE TO HAVE A LEASE IN EFFECT
THEY'RE STUCK AND THEY'RE
FINANCIALLY HANDCUFFED.
THESE ARE THE VERY, VERY POOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING TO
PROVIDE HOUSING TO THE RENTERS
IN OUR CITY.
PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE RAISE
THEIR FAMILIES AND OWN ONE OR
TWO PROPERTIES AS PART OF A
LONG TERM INVESTMENT.
AND THE WAY THIS ORDINANCE IS
WRITTEN TODAY, IT WILL DRIVE
MANY OF THEM OUT OF THE RENTAL
MARKET ALTOGETHER.
THEY'RE GOING TO EITHER TWO
OPTIONS OR WILL HAPPEN.
THEY'RE GOING TO SELL TO OWNER
OCCUPANTS REDUCING THE NUMBER
OF AVAILABLE RENTALS IN AN
ALREADY TIGHT MARKET OR THEY'LL
SELL TO LARGE INSTITUTIONAL
INVESTORS WHO ARE BETTER
EQUIPPED TO ABSORB THE COST BUT
ARE ALSO MORE LIKELY TO RAISE
THE RENTS AND ELIMINATE LOCAL
ACCOUNTABILITY.
EITHER WAY, RENTAL PRICES GO UP
AND HOUSING ACCESSIBILITY GOES
DOWN AND WE ALL WANT GREENER
RENTAL HOUSING BUT WE NEED A
TIMELINE THAT GIVES LANDLORDS
TIME TO ADAPT AND I'M URGING
YOU TO IMPLEMENT THIS ORDINANCE
IN PHASES TIED TO THE EXISTING
RENTAL STRATIFICATION PROCESS
AND I'D SAY SUGGESTION WISE
LIKE A LANDLORDS FIRST RENEWAL
GIVE THEM THEIR BASELINE SCORE
WHERE THEY JUST KNOW WHAT TO
IMPROVE AND THAT OVER THE NEXT
TWO AND A HALF YEARS REQUIRE 70
POINTS AT THE SECOND RENEWAL
AND THE FULL HUNDRED AND TEN
POINTS AT THE THIRD.
THIS ALLOWS LANDLORDS TO MAKE
UPGRADES OVER TIME ASSISTANCE
NATURALLY AGE OUT INSTEAD BEING
FORCED INTO A FINANCIAL PANIC
WITH NO RUNWAY.
IT'S MORE FAIR, IT'S MORE
EFFECTIVE AND IT PROTECTS BOTH
HOUSING PROVIDERS AND RENTERS
AND AS OTHERS HAVE ALSO STATED,
GIVE ACTUAL LIKE MORE POINT
VALUES TO THE THINGS THAT
IMPROVE EFFICIENCY LIKE WINDOWS
AND INSULATION, NOT BUS PASSES
THINGS THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY
CONTROL.
SO IF WE TRULY CARE ABOUT
SUSTAINABLE AND AFFORDABILITY
WE NEED TO CRAFT POLICIES THAT
SUPPORT BOTH AND NOT ONE AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE OTHER.
THANK YOU
.
>> THANK YOU.
MAYOR TAYLOR AND COUNCIL AND
KEN GARBER.
I'M A RENTER IN THE SECOND WARD
AND I'M VERY CONFUSED BY SOME
OF THE COMMENTS WE'VE JUST
HEARD.
THEY'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT THE
ORDINANCE THAT I'VE READ AND
THAT I'VE BEEN FOLLOWING
CLOSELY SINCE TWENTY TWENTY TWO
AS A CLIMATE ACTIVISTS ARE
HOPING FOR A STRONG RENTAL
HOUSING ORDINANCE.
WE'VE BEEN HEARING ABOUT
MANDATED UPGRADES, ABOUT AN
AGGRESSIVE TIMELINE.
IN FACT THIS ORDINANCE WAS
DELIBERATELY CRAFTED SO THAT
BUILDING OWNERS DO NOT NEED TO
MAKE A SINGLE STRUCTURAL CHANGE
TO THE BUILDING IN ORDER TO
ACHIEVE THE 70 POINTS OR THE
ONE HUNDRED AND TEN POINT AFTER
THE THREE YEAR RUNWAY PERIOD.
THERE'S NO NEED FOR NEW
WINDOWS, NO NEED FOR NEW
INSULATION OR ADD INSULATION
FOR AN ELECTRIC HVAC SYSTEM,
NEW APPLIANCES THE OPTIONS
AVAILABLE ARE THERE CAN MEET
THE REQUIRED POINT SCORE
WITHOUT DOING ANYTHING TO THE
BUILDING AT ALL?
AND I THINK I'VE HEARD THAT
THAT WAS ON THE ADVICE OF CITY
THE CITY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE
WHICH I BELIEVE INTERPRETED
STATE LAW AS SAYING THAT IF A
BUILDING YOU COULD NOT MANDATE
A HIGHER STANDARD THAN THE
BUILDING CODE GATE AT THE TIME
OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF THAT
BUILDING.
I THINK THAT'S TO THAT I DON'T
NECESSARILY THINK THAT'S A
CORRECT INTERPRETATION OF THE
LAW.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE A STRONGER
GREEN RENTAL HOUSING ORDINANCE
THAT ACTUALLY DID MANDATE
ELECTRIFICATION, STRONGER
ENERGY, ENERGY EFFICIENCY
STANDARDS AND SO FORTH.
THIS ISN'T IT AS FAR AS THE
TIMELINE 70 POINTS FOR FOR THE
FIRST RENTAL INSPECTION CYCLE
GOING UP SO THAT WOULD END IN
TWENTY TWENTY NINE AND THEN ONE
HUNDRED AND TEN POINTS WOULD
KICK IN SO SOME OF THESE
LANDLORDS WOULDN'T EVEN HAVE TO
HIT A SCORE UNTIL TWENTY THIRTY
TWO.
SO IT'S AN INCREDIBLY
PERMISSIVE TIMELINE FOR
LANDLORDS TO MEET THIS GOAL
WHICH I CONSIDER AGAIN
INSUFFICIENT FOR THE CITY TO
ACTUALLY MEET ITS CLIMATE
GOALS.
SO HOWEVER I DO AGREE WITH THE
SPEAKER WHO IS WORRIED ABOUT
RETALIATION AGAINST TENANTS FOR
THESE PERCEIVED BURDENS ON
LANDLORDS IN TERMS OF RENT
INCREASES OR DISPLACEMENT AND I
THINK THAT'S AFTER WHAT WE'VE
HEARD TONIGHT.
I THINK THAT'S A LEGITIMATE
CONCERN AND I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
SOME PROTECTION FOR TENANTS.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT FORM THAT
WOULD TAKE.
I KNOW COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON
HAS BEEN LOOKING AT THAT BUT I
DON'T THINK THE BURDEN ON
LANDLORDS IS REAL.
I THINK IT'S ALMOST COST FREE.
NEVERTHELESS THE PERCEPTION IS
OTHERWISE AND I THINK TENANTS
NEED TO BE PROTECTED.
THANK YOU
JIM IPSI TOWNSHIP THE
ORDINANCE IS GOOD IN SPIRIT.
IT'S GOING TO BE BANNED
PRACTICE BECAUSE ULTIMATELY IT
WILL END UP IN THE LAPS OF THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING TO RENT
AND RENT THE HOUSES COMING FROM
FAMILY AND BROTHER WHO OWNS HIS
OWN HEATING COOLING COMPANY AND
HAS FOR PAST THIRTY YEARS THOSE
SYSTEMS FOR GEOTHERMAL HEAT
PUMPS ARE EXPENSIVE AND IF YOU
WANT PEOPLE WHO OWN THE HOUSES
TO KEEP RENTING THEM WHAT ARE
YOU AS A CITY WILLING TO DO ONE
PERSON BROUGHT UP THE TAX
CREDIT.
ARE YOU WILLING TO TAKE THE
AMOUNT THAT THEY INVESTED TO
MAKE THAT BUILDING GREEN AND
SAY AMORTIZE IT OVER THE NEXT
15 YEARS THEY GET THAT OFF
OF THEIR PROPERTY TAXES AND IF
YOU WERE TO DO SUCH A THING,
HOW WOULD IT AFFECT THAT YOUR
REVENUE OVER THAT PERIOD
OF TIME IN THE CITY IT WOULD
DROP PROBABLY AND NOT ONLY
WOULD IT AFFECT THE SMALLER
PLACES, THE BIGGER PLACES,
BIGGER BIGGER BUILDINGS SAY
HEY, WE'RE GREEN TOO.
WE WANT TO PARTICIPATE IN THE
SAME THING YOU HAVE TO THINK
ABOUT IN THE END IT WILL WIND
UP THE RENTERS BECAUSE THESE
SYSTEMS ARE EXPENSIVE AND THEY
NEED TO BE PLACED, YOU KNOW,
DONE CORRECTLY.
IF NOT, THE RENTERS WILL GO UP
THE COST OF LIVING IN ANN ARBOR
IS GOING TO BE UNSUSTAINABLE
AND I DO AGREE WITH BOULDER,
COLORADO WHERE IT HAS AND IT
HAS INCREASED AND IT WILL
BECAUSE THESE POLICIES DO CAUSE
IT SO REALLY THINK ABOUT WHAT
YOU ALL ARE GOING TO DO IRE IF
YOU DO GO TO THE OTHER THING
AND THE PARTY WILL HAVE A GOOD
TIME COME FROM A FAMILY FEW
MEMBERS I KNOW HOW THEY DO
PARTY SO THANK YOU MAKES
VEGAS
PUBLIC
.
I DON'T HAVE ANY FOLLOWERS
CHEERING
YOU KNOW JUST SEE NO
ONE.
THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS CLOSED
PUBLIC CARRY NUMBER THREE IN
ORDER TO AMEND SECTION ONE TWO
THREE SEVEN OF CHAPTER EIGHT
ORGANIZATIONS OF BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS OF CITY CODE .
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
THANKS MAYOR TAYLOR AND KEN
GARBER AGAIN, THIS IS WHEN I
ACTUALLY CAME FOR I WASN'T
GOING TO SPEAK IN GREEN RENTAL
HOUSING UNTIL I HEARD THE
OTHERS.
ALL RIGHT.
SO YOU'RE SET TO ELIMINATE
ENERGY ENVIRONMENTAL
COMMISSIONS IN ORDER TO BETTER
ALIGN THE NEW SUSTAINABILITY
COMMISSION WITH THE CITY'S H0
CLIMATE GOALS STAFF NOT THE
COMMISSION SET THE WORK PLAN
AND THE COMMISSION WILL BE
EXPECTED TO SUPPORT THAT PLAN.
THAT'S A BIG CHANGE FROM THE
PAST WHEN COMMISSIONERS AND
COMMUNITY CONCERNS AND PROVIDED
RECOMMENDATIONS TO CITY COUNCIL
THEN MADE POLICY AND STAFF
IMPLEMENTED IT IS A BOTTOM UP
PROCESS.
THIS WILL NOW BE REVERSED.
I UNDERSTAND THE STAPEL
CONVERSION WILL CONFER WITH
COUNCIL TO ESTABLISH GOALS
WHICH STAFF WILL ASK THE NEW
COMMISSION TO WORK ON TOP DOWN
THE COMMISSION WILL BE
ACCOUNTABLE TO STAFF INSTEAD
OF STAFF ACTING TO SUPPORT THE
COMMISSION SOLELY I THINK THIS
IS A BAD IDEA BECAUSE THE NEW
COMMISSION WILL NO LONGER SET
ITS OWN AGENDA.
THAT MATTERS BECAUSE THE
COMMISSIONERS HAVE BEEN
IMPORTANT VENUES FOR THOSE
OF US WHO ARE UNHAPPY WITH THE
CITY'S PROGRESS ON CLIMATE AND
WHEN WE'RE OUT THERE SOME
INITIATIVES I'VE BEEN INVOLVED
WITH IN OCTOBER TWENTY NINETEEN
THE CLIMATE MOBILIZATION
INTRODUCED A CLIMATE EMERGENCY
DECLARATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL
COMMISSION COUNCIL PASSED A
DIFFERENT ONE A MONTH LATER IN
JANUARY.
TWENTY ONE OF THE CLIMATE
MOBILIZATION PROPOSED A GAS BAN
FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION AT ENERGY
COMMISSION IN JULY TWENTY
TWENTY ONE AND PUBLIC POWER
SUBMITTED TO PHASE ONE MUNY
FEASIBILITY STUDY PROPOSAL TO
ENERGY COMMISSION COUNCIL
APPROVED A DIFFERENT STUDY IN
JULY.
TWENTY TWENTY TWO ENERGY
COMMISSION APPROVED MY
RESOLUTION URGING
ELECTRIFICATION OF THE VILLAGE
OF ANN ARBOR PROJECT IN APRIL
THE FOLLOWING YEAR IT APPROVED
A RESOLUTION THAT I DRAFTED IN
SUPPORT OF THE GAS BAN IN
SEPTEMBER.
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND AGAIN
LAST FEBRUARY ENERGY COMMISSION
CONSIDERED MY DRAFT ORDINANCE
FOR A CARBON EMISSIONS IMPACT
FEE ON NEW CONSTRUCTION.
NOW YOU DON'T NECESSARILY HAVE
TO AGREE WITH THESE PROPOSALS
AND AND ORDINANCES TO
UNDERSTAND THE NEED FOR A SPACE
FOR PEOPLE LIKE ME TO PUT
FORWARD IDEAS AND INITIATIVES
THAT CITY STAFF AND CITY
COUNCIL MAY NOT HAVE.
REAL CHANGE COMES FROM BELOW
FROM MALCONTENTS LIKE ME,
ACTIVISTS AND GRASSROOTS
ORGANIZATIONS.
WITH ALL DUE RESPECT, REAL
CHANGE USUALLY DOESN'T COME
FROM ELECTED OFFICIALS OR
PROFESSIONAL STAFF.
I'VE HEARD THAT STAFF HAS ASKED
THE COMMISSIONERS NOT TO DRAFT
ANY MORE ORDINANCES.
STAFF WILL TAKE CARE OF THAT.
I SUSPECT THAT ALSO APPLIES TO
PEOPLE THE PUBLIC LIKE ME.
I HOPE NOT BUT I DON'T THINK
THIS IS A HEALTHY CHANGE AND
I'M HOPING THAT THE NEW
SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION WILL
BE OPEN TO CITIZEN INITIATIVES.
>> THANK YOU
.
SO ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC IS
THERE ANYONE ON LINE WHO WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING THERE?
I DON'T SEE ANY CALLERS ON LINE
FOR US HERE
SEE NO ONE.
THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS CLOSED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE REGULAR
MEETING MINUTES OF JUNE TO
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
OUR MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE
THESE MEASURES MOVE BY
COUNCILOR WATSON SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF THE MINUTES OF FAVOR
FOR POST MINUTES ARE APPROVED.
WE WANT AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND
SECTION FIVE TO NINE NINE TO BE
OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE OF TITLE FIVE
THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BANABA
MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER DISTRICT
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION PLEASE.
A B1 COUNCIL THANK YOU MAYOR.
I JUST WANT TO REASSURE
EVERYONE THAT THIS THAT IF WE
IF WE APPROVE THIS ORDINANCE IT
DOES NOT DEPRIVE ANYONE
OF MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION IN
A DECISION
.
THE DECISIONS REGARDING LAND
DIVISIONS ARE MADE ACCORDING TO
CRITERIA THAT ARE PRESCRIBED BY
STATE LAW AND THOSE CRITERIA
INCLUDE SOME REALLY BORING
THINGS THAT I'M ABOUT TO
MENTION.
THEY INCLUDE SPECIFICATIONS
REGARDING THE RATIO OF WIDTH TO
DEPTH OF THE PARCEL.
I DON'T THINK A LOT ABOUT THAT.
IT INCLUDES A REQUIRED MEANT
THAT THE PARCEL NEEDS TO HAVE
SOME KIND OF VEHICULAR ACCESS
TO AN EXISTING ROAD EITHER BY
EASEMENT OR DRIVEWAY AND THAT
THE PARCEL NEEDS TO HAVE
ADEQUATE EASEMENTS FOR PUBLIC
UTILITIES TO EXISTING PUBLIC
UTILITY FACILITIES.
>> THESE CRITERIA ARE HIGHLY
TECHNICAL DECISIONS ABOUT LAND
DIVISIONS ARE NOT DISCRETIONARY
AND THEY DO NOT COME BEFORE THE
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION OR THE
CITY COUNCIL.
>> THEY ARE ENTIRELY
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
>> SO THIS ORDINANCE CHANGE
PROPOSES TO REMOVE NOTIFICATION
OF LAND DIVISION APPLICATIONS
TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND
RESIDENTS WITHIN 300 FEET
OF THE BOUNDARY OF THE PROPERTY
BECAUSE THERE ISN'T REALLY
ANYTHING THAT RESIDENTS CAN SAY
THAT CAN CHANGE THE OUTCOME
OF THAT DECISION.
NOW IF WE THINK THAT PEOPLE
WOULD LIKE TO KNOW WHAT THEIR
NEIGHBORS ARE DOING, THAT'S
POSSIBLE.
>> I'M NOT SURE THAT WE SHOULD
HAVE A PUBLIC NOTICE
REQUIREMENT TO DO THAT AND I'M
NOT SURE THAT IT'S OUR JOB TO
LET THEM KNOW I YOU KNOW, SO
YOU MAY DISAGREE WITH THAT AND
FEEL THAT IT IS OUR JOB TO
NOTIFY PEOPLE WHAT'S GOING ON
NEXT OR TO THEM.
BUT I THINK IT'S VERY
FRUSTRATING FOR PEOPLE TO GET
NOTIFICATION OF SOMETHING WHERE
WHEN THEY TALK TO A DECISION
MAKER, THE DECISION MAKER HAS
TO SAY TO THEM THANK YOU FOR
EVERYTHING YOU'VE JUST SAID.
IT ALL MAKES A LOT OF SENSE BUT
I HAVE TO APPLY THESE CRITERIA
AND HERE THEY ARE AND YOU CAN'T
AFFECT THE OUTCOME OF THIS
DECISION.
WE HAD SOMEONE WALK OUT OF THE
CPC MEETING A COUPLE OF WEEKS
AGO BECAUSE THEY WERE REALLY
FRUSTRATED THAT THIS WAS NOT A
LAND DIVISION BUT IT WAS A
PUBLIC HEARING ON SOMETHING
THAT WAS AN ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISION AND THAT IS
FRUSTRATING.
SO THIS IS NOT ABOUT REMOVING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR DEMOCRACY.
IT'S ABOUT DIFFERENTIATING
BETWEEN DECISIONS THAT PEOPLE
CAN AFFECT AND CANNOT AFFECT.
SO I VIEW THIS AS A SIMPLE
CHANGE AND ONE THAT I SUPPORT
AND ONE THAT FOLLOWS FROM OUR
DIRECTION NOT TO OVERLY
BURDENED WITH ADMINISTRATIVE
REQUIREMENTS OR RATHER WITH
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
ADMINISTRATOR DECISIONS, NO
FURTHER DISCUSSION
WELFARE
OPPOSED IT IS PROVED TO BE TOO
IN ORDER TO ADD SECTIONS EIGHT
FIVE THREE THREE THROUGH EIGHT
FIVE FOUR ZERO.
CHAPTER ONE ZERO FIVE HOUSING
CODE OF TITLE EIGHT BUILDING
REGULATIONS OF THE CODE THE
EVEN ARBOR GREEN RENTAL HOUSING
BY COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK TAKEN
BY COUNCIL MEMBER A DENHA
DISCUSSION PLEASE A BE2 COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK ONE OF THE MAIN
CONCERNS WE'VE HEARD RELATED TO
THIS ORDINANCE ON SECOND
READING TONIGHT IS THAT IT WILL
INCREASE RENTAL PRICES FOR SOME
OF OUR OLDER AND IN MANY CASES
MORE AFFORDABLE STOCK OF RENTAL
HOMES IN ANN ARBOR.
THIS IS A CONCERN I TAKE VERY
SERIOUSLY GIVEN THE STATE
OF HOME AND RENTAL
AFFORDABILITY IN ANN ARBOR.
I HAVE NOT HAD THE I HAVE NOT
HAD THE RECEIPT FOR THE GREATER
THAN FOUR YEARS WORTH OF WORK
IN CONVERSATION ON THIS TOPIC
EITHER HERE ON COUNCIL WITH
CITY STAFF OR WITH THE ENERGY
COMMISSION.
HOWEVER, IN THE LAST FEW MONTHS
I HAVE LEARNED THAT THE
CONVERSATION HAS BEEN ROBUST
AND HAS INCLUDED EXTENSIVE
CONSULTATION WITH PRIVATE
STAKEHOLDERS INCLUDING RENTERS
AND LANDLORDS OF VARIOUS
PROPERTY SIZES.
NOW THAT I'VE HAD A CHANCE TO
DIG INTO THE AUDIT INTO THE
ORDINANCE, EXPLORE THE VARIOUS
DRAFTS OVER TIME AND ASK
QUESTIONS MANY, MANY QUESTIONS
I HAVE LEARNED THAT THERE IS
CONSIDERABLE FLEXIBILITY IN
THIS POLICY.
FIRST, THE POLICY SETS A
MINIMUM BASELINE FOR HEALTH
COMFORT AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND ONE THAT IS QUITE
ACHIEVABLE IN MY OPINION.
SECOND, IT OFFERS RENTERS
MULTIPLE PATHWAYS TO COME INTO
COMPLIANCE WITH EITHER THE HOME
ENERGY RATING SYSTEMS PATHWAY
OR THE CHECK LIST PATHWAY.
>> THIRD, RATHER THAN REQUIRING
THIS LEVEL OF EFFICIENCY
IMMEDIATELY UPON PASSAGE, IT
OFFERS A PHASE IN PROCESS THAT
ALLOWS NON-COMPLIANT HOUSEHOLDS
TO COME INTO COMPLIANCE ALONG
WITH THEIR REGULAR ONCE PER
THREE YEAR RENTAL INSPECTION.
NEXT THERE THERE'S AN EXEMPTION
PROCESS FOR THE INSTANCES WHERE
RENTAL UNIT OWNERS ARE LOW
INCOME AND UNABLE TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THE MANY MANY LOW
TO NO COST OPTIONS THAT CAN BE
USED TO ACHIEVE COMPLIANCE.
LASTLY, THE CITY HAS MANY
FINANCIAL RESOURCES ON THE
TABLE TO HELP COMPLIANCE FOR
UPGRADES.
THESE INCLUDE NEARLY TWO
MILLION DOLLARS ANNUALLY IN
HOME
ENERGY REBATES AVAILABLE
FOR ELIGIBLE PROPERTIES THROUGH
OUR CLIMATE VILLAGE.
SO IT IS A STABLE FUND FOR THIS
PURPOSE AND A DEDICATED FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS AT A
MINIMUM SET ASIDE ANNUALLY FOR
REBATES TO HELP WITH RENTAL
UPGRADES SPECIFICALLY THROUGH
THE RECENT GAS FRANCHISE
AGREEMENT.
TAKEN TOGETHER, THESE VARIOUS
ELEMENTS OF FLEXIBILITY SHOULD
ALLOW THIS ORDINANCE TO MEET
ITS AIMS WITHOUT RAISING THE
COST OF RENTING IN OUR CITY.
IT WILL IT WILL BE OF COURSE
VERY IMPORTANT TO MONITOR THIS
AS IMPLEMENTATION GETS UNDERWAY
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
THE DATA THAT COMES FROM THIS
POLICY.
IT VOTED IN THE AFFIRMATIVE
TONIGHT AND TWEAKING AS
NECESSARY MOVING FORWARD.
>> I SEE THIS ORDINANCE AS A
CRUCIAL COMPONENT OF CONSUMER
PROTECTION THAT IS ONE MORE
IMPORTANT PIECE IN THE PUZZLE
THAT IS OUR CITY'S RESPONSE TO
THE CLIMATE CRISIS.
BECAUSE OF THAT I WILL BE
VOTING IN THE IN FAVOR TONIGHT
AND WANTED TO THANK THE PUBLIC
COMMENTERS THAT CAME OUT
TONIGHT AND THOSE THAT PROVIDED
FEEDBACK VIA EMAIL AS WELL AS
CITY STAFF AND THE ENERGY
COMMISSION FOR THEIR EXTENSIVE
WORK ON THIS OVER THE YEARS.
>> THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER IA
THANK YOU AND THANK YOU COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK THAT YOU COVERED A
LOT OF GROUND THERE SO I WILL
BE MORE BRIEF BUT THIS GREEN
RENTAL HOUSING ORDINANCE I
BELIEVE ADVANCES OUR COMMITMENT
TO CARBON NEUTRALITY WHILE ALSO
IMPROVING THE DAY TO DAY LIVES
OF RENTERS IN OUR CITY.
RENTERS MAKE UP MORE THAN HALF
OF OUR POPULATION IN THE CITY
AND SO IT IS REALLY IMPORTANT
THAT WE GET THIS RIGHT THROUGH
THE EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN.
ANN ARBOR HAS MADE BOLD AND
NECESSARY COMMITMENTS TO REACH
CARBON COMMUNITY WIDE
CARBON NEUTRALITY BY 2030.
THE PURPOSE GOES BEYOND CLIMATE
ACTION.
IT'S A PUBLIC HEALTH, ECONOMIC
JUSTICE AND HOUSING STABILITY
GOAL AND IT REQUIRES ACTION
ACROSS EVERY SECTOR OF OUR
COMMUNITY INCLUDING RENTAL
HOUSING, RENTAL HOUSING.
AS I SAID, ACCOUNTS FOR MORE
THAN HALF OF OUR HOUSING STOCK
AND A SIGNIFICANT SHARE OF OUR
BUILDING EMISSIONS SO THIS
ORDINANCE SETS A REASONABLE
BASELINE.
IT ALLOWS LANDLORDS TO MEET
MODEST ENERGY PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS THROUGH EITHER A
SCORE OR A CHECKLIST.
AND THAT'S A POINT I WANT TO
EMPHASIZE BECAUSE WE HEARD FROM
A LOT OF LANDLORDS AND PROPERTY
OWNERS TONIGHT WHO ALL WERE
EMPHASIZING THE CHECKLIST
COMPONENT RATHER THAN
COMMENTING ON THE SCORE AND MY
UNDERSTANDING TALKING WITH OUR
OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY IS
THAT MOST PROPERTY OWNERS WHO
UNDERGONE ALREADY UNDERGONE THE
HERR'S EVALUATION HAVE PASSED.
AND SO I'M CONCERNED ABOUT THE
HYPERFOCUS ON THE CHECKLIST
WHEN MAYBE WE COULD BE DOING
MORE OF THE HERR'S EVALUATIONS
AND SEEING IF THERE'S IS NEED
TO WORRY OR NOT.
>> THE ORDINANCE ASKS FOR
PRACTICAL PROVEN UPGRADES
THINGS LIKE SEALING DRAFTS,
IMPROVING INSULATION, USING
EFFICIENT LIGHTING AND
APPLIANCES.
MANY RENTAL UNITS ALREADY MEET
THESE STANDARDS AS I MENTIONED
AND FOR THOSE THAT DON'T, THE
CITY IS OFFERING TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE AND FINANCIAL
SUPPORT FOR ELIGIBLE PROPERTY
OWNERS REGARDING HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY THAT IS A TOP
PRIORITY FOR ME.
THE EVIDENCE DOESN'T SUPPORT
THE CLAIM THAT THESE STANDARDS
WILL RAISE HOUSING COSTS OR
SHRINK OUR RENTAL SUPPLY.
CITIES LIKE BOULDER HAVE
IMPLEMENTED SIMILAR POLICIES
WITHOUT SEEING THOSE OUTCOMES
BUT WE HAVE SEEN IS THAT
RENTERS IN INEFFICIENT HOUSING
OFTEN PAY THE HIGHEST UTILITY
BILLS AND THAT'S A HIDDEN COST
THAT WE CAN DO SOMETHING ABOUT.
I THINK THIS IS A THOUGHTFUL
POLICY.
>> IT'S BEEN SHAPED BY INPUT
FROM RENTERS, FROM HOUSING
ADVOCATES, YES, FROM LANDLORDS
AND IT REFLECTS THE KIND
OF LEADERSHIP THAT OUR CLIMATE
GOALS DEMAND AND I'M PROUD TO
SUPPORT IT.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL,
THANK YOU.
I FIND THE CONVERSATIONS I'M
NOT GOING TO GO INTO THE
AFFORDABILITY BECAUSE I THINK
MY COLLEAGUES DID A GOOD JOB.
BUT GIVEN THE ADS AND THE TEXT
MESSAGES WE'VE ALL RECEIVED, I
WONDER HOW MANY LOW FLOW
SHOWERHEADS, EMERGENCY KITS AND
CLOTHESLINES MIGHT HAVE BEEN
BOUGHT WITH THAT MONEY.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR FOR FOLKS
WHO AREN'T THAT IN THE WEEDS ON
THIS ORDINANCE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT CHANGES LIKE HAVING AN
ONSITE WASHER AND DRYER, HAVING
EDIBLE PLANTS INTEGRATED INTO
YOUR LANDSCAPING, PROVIDING
FREE WI-FI FOR YOUR TENANTS,
HAVING A HABITABLE ROOM AREA
THAT HAS ACCESS TO NATURAL
DAYLIGHT AGAIN, THE EMERGENCY
KIT REALLY WAS ONE THAT STOOD
OUT TO ME IS NOT FEELING HUGELY
OVERBURDENSOME AND I WANT TO
POINT OUT THAT IF YOUR HOUSE OR
YOUR RENTAL UNIT IS INSULATED,
YOU GET ALMOST 20 PERCENT
OF THE WAY TO YOUR TOTAL SCORE
JUST BY HAVING A HOUSE WITH
INSULATION.
SO AGAIN, THESE FEEL LIKE
THINGS THAT IF WE CAN ALL AGREE
AND WE HEARD ON THIS SEVERAL
TIMES FROM PREVIOUS SPEAKERS
THAT HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
OF OUR RENTAL COMMUNITY IS
IMPORTANT.
>> WHY HAVEN'T THESE
REQUIREMENTS MET WITHOUT AN
ORDINANCE CHANGE?
SO I'M LOOKING FORWARD THIS I
HAVE I RAN ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL
PLATFORM THAT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO ME THAT WE TAKE
THESE STEPS AS A COMMUNITY TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE ARE DOING
WHAT WE CAN TO ACCESS AND
ACHIEVE OUR CARBON NEUTRALITY
GOALS.
AND I JUST WANT TO POINT OUT
EARLIER THIS WAS MENTIONED
BRIEFLY BY MY COUNCIL COUNCIL
COLLEAGUE EITHER THAT OR MAYBE
IT WAS MALLICK THAT ALMOST TWO
MILLION DOLLARS IS BEING MADE
AVAILABLE.
SOMEBODY ASKED WHAT WE WERE
DOING WITH SOME OF THAT MILEAGE
MONEY.
THERE'S TWO MILLION DOLLARS
THAT THE OSSI OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY HAS INVESTED
IN A COMMUNITY INVESTMENT
PROGRAM FOR OVER ONE THOUSAND
SUSTAINABILITY BASED REBATES
AND 50 PERCENT OF THOSE ARE
RESERVED FOR INCOME QUALIFIED
HOUSEHOLDS AND SO WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT LEADING FROM SORT
OF LEADING THE CHARGE OF MAKING
THIS PROGRAM ACCESSIBLE, NOT
ONLY DOES THIS CHECKLIST NOT
FEEL BURDENSOME BUT THE CITY IS
PUTTING THOSE DOLLARS FROM YOUR
TAX DOLLARS OF THIS VILLAGE TO
WORK TO TO BENEFIT AND TO MAKE
THESE PROPERTIES COME UP TO THE
STANDARD COUNCIL MEMBER
OF DENHA.
THANK YOU, MAYOR TAYLOR.
YOU KNOW, I WANT TO START ALSO
BY ADDRESSING YOU AND SAYING
THAT DESPITE A DISAPPOINTING
AND WELL-FUNDED CAMPAIGN BY A
POLITICAL PAC THAT HAS INVADED
THE PHONES AND SOCIAL MEDIA
FEEDS OF MOST OF ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS OVER THE LAST FEW
WEEKS CLAIMING THAT COUNCIL IS
ACTUALLY VOTING TONIGHT TO
RAISE RENTS, THE FLASHY ADS
SIMPLY ARE NOT TRUE.
I HOPE I ALSO HOPE THEY ARE NOT
FORESHADOWING AS I BELIEVE ONE
OF OUR PUBLIC COMMENTERS NOTED
OF WHAT SOME LANDLORDS MAY
ALREADY BE PLANNING TO DO
ANYWAY AND USING THIS AS AS AN
EXCUSE TO DO SO.
THE PROPOSED GREEN RENTAL
HOUSING ORDINANCE THAT WAS
DEVELOPED OVER THE COURSE
OF SEVERAL YEARS WAS DONE SO IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH RENTERS
INCLUDING CURRENT AND FORMER
MEMBERS OF THE RENTERS
COMMISSION LANDLORDS ACROSS
VARIOUS PROPERTY SIZES.
THE ENERGY COMMISSION LOW
INCOME HOUSING REPRESENTATIVES
AND CITY STAFF.
IT WAS A COLLABORATIVE EFFORT
TO ESTABLISH A BASIC MINIMUM
BASELINE FOR HEALTH COMFORT AND
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND IN RENTAL
HOMES AND TO ENSURE THAT
TENANTS THROUGHOUT OUR CITY
HAVE A SAFE AND EFFICIENT PLACE
TO LIVE WITHIN THE PROPOSED
ORDINANCE.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF PATHWAYS
FOR LANDLORDS TO ACHIEVE
COMPLIANCE WITHIN THEIR RENTAL
UNITS EITHER BY GETTING HOME
ENERGY RATINGS SYSTEM SCORE
OF ONE HUNDRED AND TEN POINTS
OR LESS OR BY ACHIEVING AT
LEAST 70 POINTS OUT OF A
POSSIBLE THREE HUNDRED POINTS
ON AN ANN ARBOR GREEN RENTAL
HOUSING CHECKLIST DURING THE
FIRST THREE YEAR COMPLIANCE
PERIOD AND AT LEAST ONE HUNDRED
AND TEN POINTS AGAIN OUT OF A
POSSIBLE THREE HUNDRED.
AFTER THAT, WHILE MY COLLEAGUE
COUNCILMAN RYAN NOTED THE
HERR'S OPTION FOR THE SAKE
OF THE REST OF MY COMMENTS I'D
LIKE TO FOCUS A LITTLE BIT ON
THE CHECKLIST AND NOTE THAT YOU
GET MORE THAN 10 PERCENT OF THE
POINTS MORE THAN 10 PERCENT
OF YOUR WAY THERE EIGHT POINTS
SIMPLY BY COMPLETING AN
ASSESSMENT AND HAVING AN
IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
NO ACTION JUST DOING THE
ASSESSMENT AND HAVING THE PLAN
GET TO 10 PERCENT OF THE WAY
THERE YOU CAN EARN AN
ADDITIONAL SIXTEEN POINTS
SIMPLY BY HOSTING OR SPONSORING
FOUR EVENTS EACH YEAR FOR
TENANTS ONE SWAP DAY ONE
ELECTRON TAKE BACK EVENT ONE
COOKING AND NUTRITION CLASS AND
HAVING 50 PERCENT OF UNITS
OCCUPANTS OF A RECORDING OF A
RENTER SUSTAINABILITY SESSION
SOMETHING THAT I ASSUME MOST
LANDLORDS COULD MAKE REQUIRED
AS PART OF THEIR LEASE
AGREEMENT AND THEN LETTING
FOCUS.
LET'S FOCUS ON SOME OF THE CORE
ENERGY EFFICIENCY POINTS THAT
ARE AVAILABLE.
THESE ARE THINGS THAT MOST
TENANTS I KNOW I DID WHEN I WAS
MOVING IN WOULD PROBABLY EXPECT
WITHOUT EVEN ASKING AS THEY
MOVE INTO IT INTO A UNIT AND IF
PROPERTIES HAVEN'T ALREADY DONE
THESE THINGS THEY ARE COMING AT
A STEEP AND MEASURABLE COST TO
TENANTS WHO ARE ALREADY LIVING
THERE THROUGH HIGHER HEATING,
COOLING AND ENERGY BILLS.
THESE ARE THINGS AIR SEALING
THAT IS SEALING LEAKS INDOORS
EXTERIOR WALLS, WINDOWS,
CEILINGS AND FLOORS ALLOWING
TENANTS TO CONCEAL THEMSELVES
HAVING INSULATION IN YOUR ATTIC
OR ROOF EXTERIOR WALLS, DUCTS
AND FOUNDATIONS AND CRAWL SPACE
VENTS THESE ADDITIONAL THINGS
ALONE ACHIEVE A COMBINED FORTY
SEVEN POINTS.
THESE THINGS THAT I'VE
MENTIONED SO FAR DON'T BRING
YOU TO SEVENTY ONE POINTS.
THIS DOESN'T EVEN GET INTO
THINGS LIKE LED LIGHTS
PROGRAMABLE THERMOSTATS, BIKE
PARKING ONSITE DISHWASHER THESE
ARE AND THINGS THAT WOULD
ACTUALLY SAVE LANDLORDS MONEY
LIKE NO LONGER FERTILIZING OR
WATERING THEIR PROPERTY.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BREAKS
THANKS.
YEAH I APPRECIATE THE COMMENTS
OF MY COLLEAGUES BEFORE ME SO I
WILL ALSO STRESS THE FACT THAT
THIS IS A THERE'S TWO PATHWAYS
TO REACH THIS SCORE TO TO MEET
THIS ORDINANCE.
I THINK THAT IS A PIECE THAT
WE'VE HEARD CONSISTENTLY IS
THAT THE NUMBER OF FOLKS WHO
HAVE REALLY FIXATED ON THE
CHECKLIST PATHWAY WITH REGARDS
TO THE HOME ENERGY RATING, HER
SCORE THE BEST SCORE WOULD BE
ZERO WHICH IS A NET ZERO HOME
AND IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT
100 IS SORT OF THE AVERAGE.
SO THIS IS ACTUALLY TRYING TO
MEET A SCORE THAT'S BELOW
AVERAGE FOR OUR RENTAL UNITS.
THIS IS A PLACE TO BEGIN.
SO IT'S TRYING TO HIT THE LOWER
PERFORMING HOMES IN OUR
COMMUNITY AS A AS A STARTING
PLACE FOR OUR COMMUNITY.
SO I THINK WE ARE TRYING TO
PHASE THIS IN IN A WAY THAT'S
THAT'S MANAGEABLE AND WE HAVE
BUILT IN THIS SORT OF PHASED IN
COMPLIANCE PERIOD THAT SOME
FOLKS SPOKE TO.
BUT I THINK HAS BEEN LOST FOR
SOME OTHERS IN TERMS OF OF HOW
THE IMPLEMENTATION HAPPENS.
BUT YOU KNOW, I THINK THERE HAS
BEEN SOME SORT OF LEVEL
OF ORCHESTRATED CONFUSION
AROUND THIS THAT WE'VE SEEN ON
SOCIAL MEDIA.
BUT I ALSO THINK THERE'S SOME
GENUINE CONFUSION THAT'S IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND SOME GENERAL
QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS WHETHER OR
NOT IT'S HOW THIS IS GOING TO
ROLL OUT.
AND I WANT TO YOU KNOW, THINK
FOLKS THAT CAME BEFORE US
TONIGHT AND RAISED QUESTIONS
AND I THINK SPOKE WITH GENUINE
CONCERN ABOUT HOW THIS MIGHT
PLAY OUT IN OUR OWN COMMUNITY.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, ONE QUESTION
I DID WANT TO POSE TO STAFF
TONIGHT THEY GOT BASED ON
PUBLIC COMMENT IS JUST A
QUESTION AROUND THE CHECKLIST
AND HOW THAT MIGHT EVOLVE AND
CHANGE OVER TIME.
I THINK THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF FIXATION ON THE CHECKLIST
AND IT'S BEEN CREATED IN A WAY
TO CREATE SOME FLEXIBILITY
AROUND IT AND HAVE DIFFERENT
PATHS FOR PEOPLE TO GET THERE.
BUT I UNDERSTAND, YOU KNOW,
QUESTIONS AROUND HOW POINTS ARE
ASSIGNED AND STAFF IS CERTAINLY
TO TRY TO PROVIDE SOME GUIDANCE
ON THAT.
BUT IF THEY COULD SPEAK TO THAT
THIS EVENING, I THINK THAT
MIGHT HELP TO TO CLARIFY A LOT
MORE QUESTIONS AS WELL.
THANK YOU, COUNSEL AND COUNSEL
IN PARTICULAR FOR THE QUESTION
.
I'M GOING TO BRING JOE LANG IN
TO TALK ABOUT THE DETAILS
AROUND HOW ALL THE POINTS WERE
ASSIGNED.
WE DID USE SCIENTIFIC
EVALUATION AS CONSULTANTS TO
HELP US EVALUATE MAKE SURE TO
SCORE THINGS APPROPRIATELY.
>> BUT JOE, DO YOU WANT TO TALK
IN MORE DETAIL?
YEAH, HAPPY TO UPPERS FOR
EVERYTHING I'M GOING TO SAY IS
ON OUR WEBSITE AND IN THE
ATTACHMENT THE METHODOLOGY
DOCUMENT WE FIRST STARTED BY
LOOKING AT THE BUILDING SCIENCE
OF EVERYTHING AND HOW IT
RELATES TO CARBON EMISSIONS SO
FIRST TAKING ANY ITEM THAT HAS
ANY IMPACT ON THE BUILDING
ITSELF, HOW IT WORKS THE IS HOW
IT WORKS PARTICULARLY HEATING
AND COOLING AND STATING IF YOU
MADE THIS CHANGE HOW MUCH OF A
PERCENT REDUCTION IN
CARBON EMISSIONS WOULD YOU SEE?
AND THEN WE DESIGNED A ONE TO
ONE POINT VALUE FOR THAT.
SO IF YOU HAD SOMETHING THAT
DROPPED YOUR EMISSIONS BY 30
PERCENT, IT GETS 30 POINTS ON
THE CHECKLIST.
WELL, WE DID ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
THERE ARE PLENTY OF THINGS OUT
THERE THAT DO IMPACTORS
SUSTAINABILITY TO IMPACT THE
HEALTH AND SAFETY AND JUST THE
GENERAL COMFORT OF PEOPLE
LIVING HOME AS WELL AS SOME
ITEMS THAT YOU MIGHT NOT BE
ABLE TO QUANTIFY.
AND SO WE ESTABLISHED A
STANDARD SCORING SYSTEM
THROUGHOUT ESSENTIALLY
ACCORDING TO POINTS THAT HAS
NOTHING TO DO WITH GENERAL
HEALTH AND SAFETY AND ANOTHER
TWO POINTS OF IT HAS TO DO WITH
SUSTAINABILITY SO WE COULD GET
TWO OR FOUR ITEMS AND AGAIN
BEING CONSISTENT ACROSS THAT
THE ONLY ONE THAT GOES SLIGHTLY
OUT OF THAT IS YOU SAW THE
RENTER SUSTAINABILITY SERIES
AND WHAT ACCOUNTS FOR IS AS
WE'RE DOING OUR MODELING THERE
IS A SIGNIFICANT NUMBER
OF EMISSIONS THAT COULD BE
CHANGED JUST FROM PLUG LOADS
AND THOSE ARE THINGS THAT CAN'T
READILY BE CONTROLLED BY YOU
KNOW, BY A LANDLORD OR THE
OWNER OF THE PROPERTY.
AND SO THAT ACCOUNTS FOR TENANT
BEHAVIOR IN HOW THEY'RE
MONITORING THOSE.
SO THAT'S WHY THAT ONE IS A
SLIGHTLY HIGHER SCORE COMPARED
TO THE OTHERS.
BUT THE POINTS ARE ASSIGNED
EQUALLY KIND OF ACROSS ALL
THOSE MEASURES
.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER YOU FAIR ENOUGH
.
COUNCILOR HARRISON
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
I JUST WANT TO THANK THOSE THAT
CAME OUT AND I TOOK TIME OUT
OF YOUR BUSY DAY TO COME OUT
AND ADDRESS US HERE DURING THE
PUBLIC COMMENT SHARING YOUR
STORIES AND THOSE OF MANY
OF YOUR CLIENTS THAT WILL BE
VOTING YES ON THE GREENMAIL
ORDINANCE BECAUSE THE GOALS
BEHIND IT HEALTHIER HOMES,
LOWER CARBON EMISSIONS AND
BASIC STANDARDS FOR LIVABILITY
ARE IMPORTANT.
BUT I WANT TO BE TRANSPARENT
ABOUT MY RESERVATIONS TOO.
I DO WISH THE MESSAGING HAD
BEEN MORE DIRECT.
YES, SOME TENANTS MAY SEE LOWER
UTILITY BILLS DEPENDING ON WHAT
UPGRADES THEIR LANDLORDS CHOOSE
BUT THAT'S NOT GUARANTEED AND
NEITHER IS THE IDEA THAT THOSE
SAVINGS WILL OUTWEIGH ANY RENT
INCREASES.
>> THE TRUTH IS IN A STATE
WITHOUT RENT CONTROL LANDLORDS
CAN LEGALLY PASS COMPLIANCE
COST ONTO RENTERS AND MANY WILL
.
>> SO WHILE IT'S TECHNICALLY
ACCURATE TO SAY THE ORDINANCE
ITSELF DOESN'T RAISE RENT, THAT
DOESN'T REFLECT WHAT PEOPLE ON
THE GROUND MAY EXPERIENCE EVEN
WITH THOSE CONCERNS.
I BELIEVE THE CITY HAS A
RESPONSIBILITY TO LEGISLATE
TOWARDS HEALTHIER LIVING
ENVIRONMENTS AND TOWARD MEETING
OUR CLIMATE GOALS.
>> BUT THAT RESPONSIBILITY
INCLUDES BEING HONEST WITH
RESIDENTS AND BACKING THIS
POLICY WITH PROTECTIONS TO
ENSURE RENTERS AREN'T THE ONES
BEARING THE BRUNT OF THE COST.
>> I WOULDN'T BE VOTING YES
TONIGHT IF I DIDN'T HAVE
CONFIDENCE THAT THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION WILL CONTINUE
EXPLORING AND IMPLEMENTING
PROGRAMS TO SUPPORT COMPLIANCE
PROGRAMS THAT CAN HELP REDUCE
FINANCIAL STRAIN AND PROTECT
AFFORDABILITY AS WE MOVE
FORWARD AND I PLAN AND COMMIT
TO KEEP MY EYES ON THIS AS WELL
AS THE DATA AND I WILL LOOK TO
TWEAK IF NECESSARY AS NECESSARY
IF NECESSARY.
THANK YOU.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S SO A
FOLLOW UP QUESTION TO TO MR
LANGE.
THANKS FOR EXPLAINING SORT THE
PATHWAY AND SOME OF THE
METHODOLOGY THAT WAS USED
AROUND THAT KIND OF THE SECOND
PART OF THE QUESTION WAS TRYING
TO GET AT HOW WE MIGHT HOW THAT
CHECKLIST MIGHT EVOLVE AND WE
THERE WERE SOME QUESTIONS
RAISED DURING PUBLIC COMMENT
AROUND KIND OF DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES.
I KNOW THAT WE'VE WE'VE LOOKED
YOU KNOW, WE'VE GAINED FROM THE
EXPERIENCES WE'VE WE'VE DRAWN
LESSONS FROM OTHER COMMUNITIES
BUT WE'RE ALSO, YOU KNOW,
TRYING TO IMPROVE AND BRING
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND THINKING
TO THINGS AS WELL.
>> SO I'M JUST CURIOUS HOW THIS
THIS CHECKLIST MIGHT EVOLVE OR
WITH TIME AS WELL.
>> YEAH, THERE'S THE
FLEXIBILITY WITHIN THERE IF WE
NOTICE THAT EVERYTHING'S GOING
IN A CERTAIN DIRECTION EITHER
POSITIVE OR NEGATIVE TO MAKE
UPDATES TO THAT THAT STILL NEED
TO GO THROUGH THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS.
SO IT'S NOT JUST A THING WE CAN
RANDOMLY CHANGE JUST FOR THE
SAKE OF CHANGING IT,
PARTICULARLY AS IT RELATES TO
THE POINT TOTALS, ESPECIALLY
THOSE WHEN THOSE ARE IN THE
ORDINANCE AND THAT WOULD
REQUIRE GOING BACK THROUGH
COUNCIL TO CHANGE THE POINT
REQUIRED EITHER THROUGH THROUGH
EITHER OF THE PATHWAYS COUNCIL
MEMBER WATSON OR I'D LIKE TO
THANK EVERYBODY THAT CAME OUT
TONIGHT AND I WOULD ALSO LIKE
TO TO MAYBE POINT THEM TOWARD
OUR STAFF MEMBERS WHO HAVE BEEN
ANSWERING QUESTIONS TONIGHT.
>> JO JO LANCS EMAIL IS ON THE
CITY WEBSITE AND HE IS A
STAFFER, YOU KNOW, DEDICATED TO
THIS PROGRAM AND I'M CONFIDENT
THAT OUR STAFF CAN ANSWER A LOT
OF QUESTIONS AND PROBABLY MOST
IMPORTANTLY THEY CAN DIRECT
PROPERTY OWNERS TOWARD REBATES
THAT MAY HELP THEM COME INTO
COMPLIANCE OR FINANCE SOME
OF SOME IMPROVEMENTS THAT ARE
NECESSARY.
COUNCIL MALIK AND I HAD A
CONSTITUENT WHO REACHED OUT TO
US PROBABLY YOU KNOW, ABOUT A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO AND THEY
OWN A SINGLE HOUSE THAT THEY
RENT OUT AND THEIR SINGLE
PROPERTY LAND OWNER AND
LANDLORD AND AFTER KIND OF A
LOT OF EMAILS EXCHANGED AND
HONESTLY SOME OF THEM QUITE
HEARTFELT ABOUT THE COSTS
INCURRED BY SINGLE PROPERTY
OWNERS THAT ISN'T YOU KNOW,
WHILE THEY DIDN'T NECESSARILY
COME AROUND TO FULL THROATED
SUPPORT OF THE ORDINANCE, THEY
ACTUALLY DID FEEL A LOT BETTER
ABOUT THEIR COMPLIANCE AND
ACTUALLY THEY THEIR MOST RECENT
MESSAGE KIND OF CHANGED TO A
FEELING OF THAT THAT THE
ORDINANCE MAYBE WAS A LITTLE
EASIER LIKE TOO EASY TO COME
INTO COMPLIANCE AND THAT'S
BECAUSE THE HURST SCORE IS
ACTUALLY BASED ON PROPERTIES
THAT MEET THE 2006 BUILDING
CODE .
SO THIS PERSON TURNS OUT THE
PROPERTY THEIR MANAGER I THINK
HAD BEEN BUILT IN 2007.
>> SO IT WAS PRETTY MUCH
ASSURED THAT IF THEY WERE TO DO
HER ASSESSMENT THEY WOULD BE
ABLE TO PASS AND SO JUST TO
KIND OF CLARIFY AGAIN ON THE
HER SCORE HOUSE THAT MEANS THE
2006 BUILDING CODE WOULD SCORE
A HUNDRED ON THE FIRST SCORE
THE CITY IS ASKING FOR A SCORE
BELOW 110 AND SO THAT MEANS THE
CITY IS ASKING FOR YOU TO YOUR
PROPERTY TO BE BETTER THAN 10
PERCENT WORSE THAN THE 2006
BUILDING CODE .
SO YOU HAVE LIKE A 10 PERCENT
BUFFER ABOVE SOMETHING THAT
WOULD HAVE COMPLIED WITH THE
TWO THOUSAND SIX THAT SOMETHING
BUILT TO 2006 CODE .
SO YOU KNOW, WE KNOW A LOT
OF THE HOUSING STOCK IN IT.
I WAS OLDER BUT I THINK THAT
PAINTS IT IN A MORE REASONABLE
LIGHT OF TRYING TO COME INTO
COMPLIANCE FROM I GUESS THE
CODE THAT WAS 19 YEARS AGO
FURTHER DISCUSSION FROM I'LL BE
SUPPORTING THE THE ORDINANCE
TONIGHT.
I'M GRATEFUL FOR THE WORK THAT
HAS BEEN DONE BY THE LARGE
NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF THE
COMMUNITY AS WELL OF COURSE AS
THE OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
INNOVATIONS TO CRAFT A
ORDINANCE WHICH IN MY VIEW AND
UPON REFLECTION ADVANCES
MULTIPLE GOALS, ADVANCES A GOAL
OF COURSE OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
ADVANCES THAT IN A MANNER THAT
IS I BELIEVE EQUITABLE THAT
ADVANCES EQUITY AND JUSTICE.
IT WILL OVER THE COURSE OF TIME
I BELIEVE IMPROVE THE HOUSING
STOCK THE CITY THAN ARBER AND
WILL DO SO IN A MANNER
THAT IS
AS INCREMENTAL AS IS ALL CHANGE
REGRETTABLY IS AND WILL ENABLE
LANDLORDS OVER TIME TO TO
EVOLVE INTO COMPLIANCE IF THEY
ARE NOT COMPLIANCE AND TO
REALIZE THAT THEY ARE IN
COMPLIANCE IF INDEED THEY ARE
FURTHER THE CITY IS PUTTING ITS
MONEY WHERE ITS MOUTH IS AS HAS
BEEN OBSERVED, THE COMMUNITY
CLIMATE ACTION MILLAGE DOES
INDEED SUPPORT ENERGY
EFFICIENCY EFFORTS AND DOES SO
IN VARIOUS SECTORS OF OUR CITY.
THE THE WORK THAT WE'VE DONE
WITH THE HEATING ORDINANCE
APARTMENT WITH THE HEATING
FRANCHISE WILL ALSO PROVIDE FOR
ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO GO OUT INTO
THE MARKETPLACE TO SUPPORT
ENERGY EFFICIENCY, STRUCTURAL
ENERGY EFFICIENCY.
THIS SET OF THINGS IN ADDITION
WITH THE NATURAL ITERATION THAT
WILL OCCUR BOTH IN THE OFFICE,
IN THE COMMUNITY AND HERE AT
THE TABLE I THINK RESULTS IN A
PROGRAM THAT IS GOOD NOW AND
WILL BE GREAT LATER.
>> I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO IT.
FURTHER DISCUSSION ON A FAVOR
WELL POSED.
>> IT IS PROVED B3 AND AUDIENCE
TO AMEND SECTION ONE TWO THREE
SEVEN OF CHAPTER EIGHT
ORGANIZATIONS OF BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS OF CITY CODE MOVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER MALATE
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF B THREE
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK.
>> I SPOKE ON THIS A LITTLE BIT
AT FIRST READING AND SO I WON'T
REPEAT MY SAME COMMENTS BUT I
LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING WHAT THE
SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION IS
ABLE TO ACCOMPLISH ASSUMING IT
IS PASSED TONIGHT AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO OUR DEDICATED
COMMUNITY MEMBERS REMAINING
ENGAGED AND CONTRIBUTING AS
THEY ALWAYS HAVE.
>> THANK YOU.
FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER KORDELL.
I WANT TO THANK EVERYONE WHO
HAS SERVED ON THESE COMMISSIONS
AND ARE CURRENTLY SERVING IT.
>> IT'S DEFINITELY A COMMITMENT
NOT ONLY OF TIME BUT
OF EXPERTIZE THE CONVERSATIONS
IN THESE MEETINGS ARE
THOUGHTFUL AND I GUESS I WANT
TO JUST POINT OUT SOMETHING
THAT WAS SAID EARLIER.
NOTHING ABOUT THIS NEW
COMMISSION ACTUALLY PROHIBITS
INNOVATION BY ITS
COMMISSIONERS.
>> RATHER IT DIRECTS ENERGY AND
EXPERTIZE IN A WAY THAT
COMPLEMENTS THE CITY'S EFFORTS
BOTH OF THESE COMMISSIONS WERE
FORMED WELL BEFORE OSSI IS NOT
EVEN A TWINKLE IN OUR EYE AND
NOW WE HAVE AS HAS BEEN
REFERENCED SEVERAL TIMES
TONIGHT OUR COMMUNITY CLIMATE
VILLAGE WE HAVE AN OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY.
WE HAVE A LOT OF REALLY SMART
AND TALENTED PEOPLE WORKING ON
THESE ISSUES AND CURRENTLY THEY
FEEL KIND OF SILOED.
SO BEING ABLE TO BRING THESE
COMMISSIONS TOGETHER, NO ONE IS
LEAVING THESE COMMISSIONS.
WE'RE TRULY COMBINING THEM INTO
ONE TO ME GETS THE BIGGEST
BRAINS IN THE ROOM TOGETHER
TALKING WITH CITY STAFF WHO CAN
ACTUALLY AFFECT THE CHANGE IN
COLLABORATION WITH COUNCIL TO
MAKE THESE THESE STEPS FORWARD
TO ACHIEVING CARBON NEUTRALITY
POSSIBLE QUICKER.
>> SO THANK YOU AGAIN TO
EVERYONE WHO SERVED ON THESE
COMMISSIONS AND I'M LOOKING
FORWARD TO WORKING WITH YOU
GOING FORWARD.
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S NO THANKS TO
THE PREVIOUS COMMENTS CONCUR.
I THINK YOU KNOW AGAIN THIS I
APPRECIATE EVERYBODY WHO'S
WHO'S SERVED ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION IN THE
PAST IN THE PAST AND CURRENTLY
DOES I THINK THE CREATION
OF OUR NEW SUSTAINABILITY
COMMISSION IS ESSENTIAL FOR
ALIGNING OUR WORK WITH OUR
SUSTAINABILITY, WORK WITH OUR
COMMISSIONS AND MAKING SURE
THAT WE'RE GETTING ADVICE FROM
COMMISSIONS THAT ARE SORT
OF ALIGNED WITH HOW THE
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE IS
ALIGNED AS WELL.
>> AND YEAH, AGAIN, THIS IS NOT
YOU KNOW, I'VE PRIOR TO BEING
ON COUNCIL I'VE SERVED ON THE
ENERGY COMMISSION BACK IN 2000
AND SEVEN I THINK AND PLANNING
COMMISSION A COUPLE OF TIMES
I'VE SEEN THE EVOLUTION OF IT.
>> I'LL SAY IT'S A MUCH MORE I
THINK EFFECTIVE BODY TODAY THAN
IT WAS BACK WHEN I SERVED ON IT
.
>> BETTER PEOPLE ON IT NOW I
DON'T KNOW NOW BUT IT'S YOU
KNOW, AS OUR STAFF IS
PROFESSIONALIZED AS WELL IN THE
CITY, IT ALLOWS OUR COMMISSION
TO BE PROVIDING ADVICE AND
DIGGING INTO THE SUBSTANCE
OF OUR WORK AND PROVIDING
ADVICE THAT'S MUCH MORE
CONSEQUENTIAL TO THE ACTIONS
THAT WE'RE TAKING AT THE TABLE
.
>> AND SO I'VE SEEN THE
COMMISSIONS EVOLVE FROM SORT
OF MORE PLACES OF DIALOG AND
RATHER AND NOW MORE TOWARDS
WORKING TOWARDS SORT
OF ADVISING ON THE REAL WORK
THAT WE'RE DOING.
>> AND SO, YOU KNOW, I THINK
THERE'S STILL ABSOLUTELY A
PLACE FOR FOR FOR RESIDENTS TO
BE ENGAGED BOTH IN COMING
DIRECTLY TO US IN TERMS
OF ENCOURAGING US TO TAKE
ACTION AND ALSO GOING TO OUR
COMMISSIONS THAT WILL CONTINUE
TO BE THE PLACE WHERE WE
GREATLY APPRECIATE THE WORK
THAT THAT OUR RESIDENTS DO
SERVING ON THESE COMMISSIONS.
AND I LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING
HOW THIS EVOLVES AND HELPS TO
TO SHAPE OUR WORK AS WE MOVE
FORWARD.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER DENHA THANK YOU.
I'LL BE VERY BRIEF BECAUSE A
LOT OF WHAT I WANTED TO SAY HAS
BEEN NOTED BUT ALSO AS A FORMER
ENERGY COMMISSION LIAISON
MYSELF I WANT TO THANK
EVERYBODY WHO HAS SERVED AND
WILL CONTINUE TO SERVE IN THIS
NEW CAPACITY AND I ALSO WANTED
TO KIND OF ADDRESS THE CONCERN
THAT WAS RAISED AT LEAST BY MR
GARBER EARLIER AND IN THE
PUBLIC COMMENT PUBLIC HEARING
PERIOD AROUND KIND OF THAT
INNOVATION PIECE THE ABILITY
FOR PEOPLE TO WORK FROM THE
BOTTOM UP AND AND REITERATE
THAT AS SOME OF MY COLLEAGUES
HAVE MENTIONED, I THINK THERE'S
STILL PLENTY OF OPPORTUNITY FOR
RESIDENTS TO COME TO THOSE
COMMISSIONS TO SHARE IDEAS TO
CONTINUE TO BE INNOVATIVE AS WE
IMPLEMENT OUR TWO ZERO PLAN.
BUT AS SOMEBODY WHO HAS SERVED
ON THIS COMMISSION AS WELL AS
LIAISON AS A VOTING MEMBER
ACTUALLY IN THAT ON THAT
COMMISSION ENERGY COMMISSION,
WE'VE ALSO SEEN PERIODS OF TIME
WHERE THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF OVERLAP BETWEEN THE
COMMISSIONS THAT ARE KIND
OF WORKING THROUGH A SINGLE
LIAISON RATHER THAN HAVING ALL
OF THOSE PEOPLE AT THE TABLE
DOING KIND OF DUPLICATIVE WORK
RATHER THAN DOING IT IN A
COLLABORATIVE WAY.
AND SO I THINK THE ABILITY TO
TEAR DOWN THOSE SILOS TO TO
DEVELOP AN AGENDA FOR THE YEAR
BASED ON ACHIEVING OUR TWO ZERO
PLAN WHICH AS OTHERS HAVE
MENTIONED WASN'T IN PLACE AT
THE TIME THAT THESE COMMISSIONS
WERE ORIGINALLY CREATED IS A
REAL OPPORTUNITY TO DRIVE SOME
OF THAT WORK TOWARDS ACHIEVING
THE GOALS WE'VE ALREADY SET AS
THE CITY AND THEN CONTINUE I
THINK TO ITERATE AND BE
INNOVATIVE AS WE WORK THROUGH
THOSE THOSE SOLUTIONS.
AND SO I'M REALLY LOOKING
FORWARD TO WHAT THIS NEW
COMMITTEE CAN ACHIEVE, YOUR
COMMISSION CAN ACHIEVE.
AND AGAIN, THANK EVERYONE WHO
IS WILLING TO CONTINUE SERVING
IN ITS NEW CAPACITY.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION ON FAVOR
POSED IT IS APPROVED SIWAN IN
ORDER TO AMEND THE ZONING MAP
SECTION FIVE TEN POINT TWO
OF CHAPTER 55 CITY CODE FIVE
POINT NINE ACRES FROM TWC
TOWNSHIP DISTRICT TO OUR FOUR E
WITH CONDITIONS MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT TO FIVE
THROUGH THREE SEVEN ONE ZERO
CHURCH ROAD AND TWO ONE EIGHT
ZERO ANN ARBOR SALEEN ROAD
ROBERTSON HOMES REZONING MOVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER.
I ARE SEEKING MY COUNCILOR
ACKMANN DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF ONE I BELIEVE WE HAVE AN
INTRODUCTION BY MR LEONARD
I
THOUGHT SAW BOTH TWO YES
.
MR LEONARD WILL BE JOINING US
ON
GOOD EVENING MALCOLM.
I'M NOT AWARE OF AN
INTRODUCTION FOR ITEM SEE ONE
BUT I'M HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS TO HAVE INFORMATION
FOR ITEM C2 AND C3 FOR YOU.
WELL I WAS JUST SO EXCITED AS
AM I NOT DOING ALL GOOD ALL
GOOD THINGS COME FROM YOU MR
LEONARD.
>> AND SO YOU KNOW I WAS JUST
HOPING FOR MORE IN ANY EVENT I
WILL HOLD OFF IN EAGER
ANTICIPATION OF WHAT COMES
BEFORE COMES NEXT.
>> IN THE MEANTIME COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH I FEEL SO BAD THAT
YOU WERE PROMISED MR LEONARD
AND NOW YOU END WITH ME BUT
THIS IS A REZONING ASSOCIATED
WITH INFILL PROJECT WHICH IS
ALWAYS A REASON TO BE CHEERFUL.
>> SO APPROVAL OF THIS
ORDINANCE WILL REZONE FOR
RECENTLY ANNEXED PARCELS ON A
CHURCH AND OUR ROSELYN ROADS
FROM TOWNSHIP TO OUR FOR E WITH
CONDITIONS ARE FOR E IS A
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL
CATEGORY.
THE PROPOSED CONDITIONS
CONDITION THAT WE ARE ASKED TO
ACCEPT IS TO LIMIT THE MAXIMUM
HEIGHT FOR THIS PROJECT TO
FIFTY FEET IN THIS ARE FOR E
WITH CONDITIONS ARE FOR EASE ON
OTHERWISE A LIMITED HEIGHT.
AS I SAID IT'S AN INFILL
PROJECT SO IT'S IMPORTANT TO
ALIGN WITH EXISTING ZONING IN
THE NEIGHBORING PARCELS AND
THOSE ARE A MIX OF RESIDENTIAL
ZONING INCLUDING R TO A AND OUR
B R TO A IS A 30 FOOT HEIGHT
LIMIT SO UNLIMITED HEIGHT ER
WOULD REALLY NOT BE
APPROPRIATE.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO PUT ON THE
RECORD WHY THIS REZONING IS
REQUESTED AND WHY IT'S
APPROPRIATE.
I'M
I WANT TO CONFUSE YOU
THAT'S NOT BEFORE US TONIGHT SO
REZONING WILL PREPARE THE WAY
FOR 75 TOWN HOME FOR SALE
RESIDENTIAL UNITS IN ONE, TWO,
THREE STORY BUILDINGS WITH
GARAGES UNDERNEATH AND A
ROOFTOP ROOFTOP LIVING AREA.
THIS IS AN ALL ELECTRIC PROJECT
SO AS I SAID, THE CONDITIONS
FOR THIS ZONING CAP THE HEIGHT
AT 50 FEET.
BUT THE PETITIONER HAS
CLARIFIED FOR US THAT THE
MEASUREMENT OF THE HOUSES TO
THE PARAPET IS 34 FEET AND THE
DECK IF
YOU KNOW ON THE ROOFTOP
RAISES RIGHT TO 40 FEET.
>> SO STILL WE'RE VERY MUCH IN
LINE WITH THE SURROUNDING
ADJACENT ZONING.
AND I WANT TO NOTE THAT THERE
ARE 40 ZONING PERMITS A DENSITY
AS HIGH AS 75 UNITS PER ACRE.
BUT THE PROPOSED PROJECT WILL
COME IN AT A DENSITY OF ONE
UNITS PER ACRE.
>> SO IT IS LOWER THAN WHAT OUR
40 PERMITS AND IT'S EVEN LOWER
DENSITY THAN THE ADJACENT ARE
TO A ZONING WHERE THE MAXIMUM
IS 17 UNITS PER ACRE.
SO THIS IS GOING TO HARMONIZE
BEAUTIFULLY.
OUR FOUR ZONING AS REQUESTED
HERE DUE TO THE STYLE
OF HOUSING WHICH IS ATTACHED TO
TOWNHOMES THESE MAY BE HALF THE
COST OF SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED
HOMES.
>> THAT'S GOOD NEWS AND IT'S
ALSO REQUESTED DUE TO THE
AMOUNT OF OPEN SPACE REQUIRED
ON THE SITE THE SITE PLAN
PROPOSES TO PROVIDE 49 PERCENT
OF SITE AREA IS OPEN SPACE
WHICH IS JUST UNDER THE MINIMUM
OF 50 PERCENT OPEN SPACE AND WE
CAN FEEL OK ABOUT LOSING ONE
PERCENT BECAUSE THIS IS CLOSE
TO PARKS AND THAT'S NOT MUCH SO
WE WILL BE ACCOMPLISHING OUR 40
ZONING IS CONSISTENT WITH
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED LAND USE
RECOMMENDATION IN THE PLAN AND
IT ACCOMPLISHES GREAT GOALS
LIKE INCREASED DENSITY NEAR
TRANSIT CORRIDORS AND MINIMAL
SURFACE PARKING AND YES NO
NATURAL GAS CONNECTIONS.
SO I AM VERY HAPPY ABOUT THIS
PROJECT AND I HOPE YOU WILL
SHARE MY JOY
.
OH YEAH
HONORED TO SIGN GREETING MAYOR
AND COUNCIL BROTHER THE
PLANNING MANAGER.
I DID RECEIVE A COUPLE
OF INQUIRIES FOR MS NEXT COUPLE
OF ITEMS I WILL ADDRESS THOSE
AND OF COURSE BE HAPPY TO
ANSWER ANY ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS
THAT YOU HAVE A SEAT TO THE
QUESTION POSED WAS WHAT IS THE
PROCESS TODAY AND HOW WOULD THE
PROPOSED CHANGES MODIFY THESE
AMENDMENTS IF ADOPTED UNDER THE
CURRENT CITY?
UNDER THE CURRENT ORDINANCE THE
CITY CREATES PUBLIC NOTICES,
PUBLISHES NOTICE IN THE PAPER
OF RECORD AND MAILS TO ALL
PROPERTY OWNERS AND RESIDENTS
WITHIN 300 FEET NOTICE OF A
PUBLIC HEARING FOR ALL SITE
PLANS REZONING SPECIAL
EXCEPTION USE PERMITS AND FOR
ZONING TAX CHANGES NOTICE IS
ONLY PUBLISHED IN THE NEWSPAPER
OF RECORD UNDER THE PROPOSED
ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS SITE PLANS
WOULD NO LONGER BE NOTICED IN
THE PAPER OF RECORD NOR WOULD
NOTICE BE MAILED TO PROPERTY
OWNERS, RESIDENTS AND 300 FEET
OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY.
A PUBLIC HEARING WOULD BE
REPLACED BY A PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITY AND EACH OTHER FOR
SITE PLANS SO THERE WOULD STILL
BE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC
FEEDBACK ON THE PROPOSED PLAN.
HOWEVER, AGAIN NOTICE WOULD NOT
BE PROVIDED SPECIFICALLY IN
ADVANCE.
THE PROPOSED CHANGES WOULD NOT
MAKE ANY CHANGES TO MAP
AMENDMENTS SPECIAL EXCEPTION
NEWS PERMITS, REZONING OR
ZONING TAX CHANGES THOSE WOULD
STILL BE PUBLISHED NOTICED AS
THEY CURRENTLY DO TODAY
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF TO COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH.
>> I THANK YOU VERY MUCH MR.
LEONARD.
>> I JUST WANT TO ADD THAT THIS
CHANGE THIS CHANGE IS REALLY
PART OF AN ONGOING COMMITMENT
TO MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION AND
THAT THIS ITEM IN THE NEXT
ADDRESS TO PATHWAYS FOR
PARTICIPATION, THE NEXT ITEM
THAT WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
TALKS ABOUT COMMUNITY MEETINGS
HELD BY DEVELOPERS.
>> THIS ITEM IS ABOUT PUBLIC
COMMENT OR PUBLIC HEARINGS AT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
CITY COUNCIL.
>> SO THE MAIN THING THE MAIN
CHANGE THAT'S MADE HERE IS THAT
WE RESERVE PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR
DECISIONS ON PROJECTS AND
CHANGES TO THE DEVELOPMENT
CODE THAT WAIT A MINUTE SORRY I
DON'T WANT TO SAY THAT FOR
DECISIONS ON PROJECTS THAT
INVOLVE DISCRETION.
SO THAT'S REZONING PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS AND SPECIAL
EXCEPTION USES THESE
DISCRETIONARY WE GET TO
EXERCISE JUDGMENT AND WHAT OUR
CONSTITUENTS THINK AND HOW THEY
SEE THE PROJECT BASED ON WHERE
THEY SEE IT FROM CAN INFLUENCE
OUR JUDGMENT.
WHAT WE HEAR AT PUBLIC HEARINGS
CAN INFORM HOW A PROJECT TURNS
OUT SO NOTICE OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS IS PUBLISHED 15 DAYS
PRIOR TO A PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING CENTER PROPERTY OWNERS
ARGUMENTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATIONS WITHIN 300 FEET.
IF I MAKE ANY MISTAKES, MR.
LERNER, PLEASE JUMP IN RIGHT
AFTER NOW MANY SITE PLANS
REVIEWED BY THE CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION DO NOT INVOLVE
DISCRETION.
IT'S ABOUT APPLYING CRITERIA IF
THE CRITERIA ARE MET, THE
PROJECT HAS TO BE APPROVED.
WE WILL NO LONGER HAVE PUBLIC
HEARINGS FOR THESE BECAUSE IT
CAN BE FRUSTRATING TO COME TO A
HEARING AND OFFER A LOT
OF FEEDBACK AND HAVE A CERTAIN
AMOUNT OF EMOTIONAL FEELINGS
ABOUT IT AND FIND THAT YOU
CAN'T HAVE AN IMPACT BECAUSE
YOU'RE YOUR REPRESENTATIVE AS
OPPOSED TO CORRUPTION BUT STILL
EACH OF THESE SITE PLAN REVIEWS
WILL HAVE ITS OWN PUBLIC
COMMENT PERIOD ON THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AGENDA AND THAT WILL
BE AN ADOPTED PRACTICE THROUGH
PLANNING COMMISSION CRITERIA.
IT DOESN'T NEED TO BE IN THIS
ORDINANCE CHANGE BUT THAT IS
EACH ONE OF THEM WILL HAVE ITS
OWN PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD, NOT
JUST THE GENERAL PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD AT THE BEGINNING
OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
SO WE CARE WHAT PEOPLE THINK.
WE CARE FOR THEM TO COME AND
EXPRESS TO US SOMETHING THAT
THEY DON'T LIKE BECAUSE IT'S IN
OUR CODE AND MAYBE WE SHOULD
THINK ABOUT CHANGING OUR CODE .
>> THAT'S ALL REALLY IMPORTANT
BUT IT'S IMPORTANT THAT PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND WHAT ARE THE LIMITS
OF OUR AUTHORITY AND DISCRETION
BECAUSE OTHERWISE
MISCOMMUNICATIONS AND AND AND
UNHAPPINESS HAPPENS THAT WE
DON'T HAVE ANY POWER OVER.
SO THAT IS MY TWO CENTS FURTHER
DISCUSSION COUNCIL MEMBER
BREEKS THANK YOU FOR BOTH
OF THOSE DESCRIPTIONS AROUND
IT.
I WOULD LIKE TO NOTE I THINK I
WANT TO MAKE SURE THE PAPER
OF RECORD MR. LEONARD IS STILL
THE WASHTENAW LEGAL NEWS .
>> IS THAT CORRECT?
THAT'S CORRECT.
THERE ARE INFREQUENT TIMES
WHERE WE PUBLISH ANOTHER SOURCE
TO TIME RESTRICTION OR A
MODIFICATION BUT THAT IS
TYPICALLY OUR PAPER RECORD.
>> YEAH.
SO I WITH THE EXCEPTION
PROBABLY A FEW IN OUR COMMUNITY
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT THE WHAT
THIS IS A PUBLICATION THAT
FOLKS ARE ARE REFERENCING ON A
REGULAR BASIS.
AND SO YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT
THIS IS THE POINT AROUND
HELPING TO EDUCATE THROUGH
PARTLY OUR PROCESS IS SET UP AS
WELL.
YOU KNOW, A PUBLIC HEARING IS A
SPACE WHERE WE'RE IT'S WE HAVE
SOME DISCRETION AND PUBLIC
COMMENT IS A SPACE WHERE WE
WANT TO HEAR FROM RESIDENTS AND
UNDERSTAND, YOU KNOW, ELEMENTS
THAT THEY MAY LIKE OR NOT LIKE
AND CAN HELP SHAPE THE
CODE MOVING FORWARD.
BUT I THINK THESE PROCESS
CHANGES MAKE SENSE AND WILL
HELP TO ENHANCE OUR AND BETTER
INFORM CITIZENS OF OF OUR
PROCESS AND HOW THEY WORK
FURTHER DISCUSSION OR FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IT'S APPROVED C THREE
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION
FIVE DOT 284 OF CHAPTER FIFTY
FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE OF TITLE FIVE CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER ACKMANN.
>> SECOND MY COUNTERPART
GRENELLE DISCUSSION PLEASE OF C
THREE MR. LUNNER THANK YOU
MAYOR TAYLOR SIMILAR QUESTION
POSED HERE THAT IS HOW WOULD
THE PROCESS CHANGE BASED ON THE
ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS TODAY
VERSUS THESE AMENDMENTS BEING
ADOPTED?
A COUPLE OF CHANGES ARE WOULD
BE AFFECTED BY THESE PROPOSED
AMENDMENTS IF ADOPTED.
I DO WANT TO POINT OUT WE'VE
ADDED A GRAPHIC TO THE AGENDA
THANK YOU TO THE CLERK'S OFFICE
THAT HOPEFULLY IS A HELPFUL
RESOURCE TO MAYOR COUNCIL AND
OF COURSE THE PUBLIC TO
UNDERSTAND SOME OF THESE
CHANGES AS WELL.
AT A HIGH LEVEL WE'RE REACHING
WE'RE PROPOSING RETITLING
OF THIS ORDINANCE FROM CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION TO COMMUNITY
PARTICIPATION AND TO ELIMINATE
ANY SORT OF CONCERNS OR BEARS
THAT CITIZENSHIP STATUS MIGHT
HAVE A RELATIONSHIP TO OUR
ENCOURAGEMENT PEOPLE TO
PARTICIPATE IN PROCESS.
WE'RE ALSO PROPOSING THROUGH
THESE CHANGES SHE CHANGED THE
TYPES OF PROJECTS THAT ARE
DEFINED AS A TYPE ONE PROJECT
WHICH WOULD REQUIRE A COMMUNITY
MEETING VERSUS TYPE TWO PROJECT
WHICH IS SIMPLY A NOTIFICATION
TO ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS
FOLLOWING SOME OF THE SIMILAR
CONVERSATION YOU JUST HEARD
FROM COUNCILMAN BRITISH ANY
LEGISLATIVE ORIENTED DECISION
IS PROPOSED TO BE A TYPE ONE
WHICH WOULD REQUIRE A MEETING
AND ANY ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISIONS SUCH AS THE SITE PLAN
WOULD BE A TYPE TO AND THIS IS
A CHANGE WHERE PREVIOUSLY WE
HAD INCLUDED LEGISLATIVE
DECISIONS AS A TYPE ONE AS WELL
AS PROJECTS OF DEFINED SIZE,
SCALE OR QUANTITY
OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS.
THERE'S ALSO PROPOSED CHANGES
OCCURRING WHEN THE TIMING
OF THIS CONSISTENT WITH YOUR
RESOLUTION FROM LAST YEAR
MAKING THIS TIMING MORE
PARALLEL WITH THE SUBMISSION
OF AN ACTUAL SITE PLAN PETITION
SO THE PROPOSED CHANGES WOULD
INSTEAD OF REQUIRING THIS
PROCESS TO OCCUR BEFORE THE
SUBMISSION OF A PROJECT TO THE
CITY FOR APPROVAL, IT WOULD
REQUIRE THAT THAT MEETING BE
NOTICED AND HELD WITHIN 45 DAYS
OF NOTICE BY THE CITY THAT WE
HAVE ACCEPTED A PROJECT FOR
REVIEW.
THAT MEANS THAT WE HAVE DEEMED
IT COMPLETE WITH THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION THAT WE CAN NOT
ONLY START THAT PROCESS BUT
SHARE THAT INFORMATION WITH THE
PUBLIC WITH THE BENEFIT OF ALL
THAT INFORMATION THAT HAS TO
HAPPEN WITHIN 45 DAYS.
IT STILL MAINTAINS THE MINIMUM
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS THAT NOTICE
IS A MINIMUM OF FIFTEEN DAYS
PRIOR TO ANY MEETING AND WE'VE
ALSO HAD THE PROPOSED CHANGE
THAT A NOTICE TO BE REQUIRE THE
REPORTING OF THAT MEETING HAS
TO BE SHARED WITH THE CITY
WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER THE
COMPLETION OF THE
OF THE
MEETING.
I WILL NOTE THAT THERE IS A LOT
OF CONVERSATION THAT THE
PLANNING COMMISSION ABOUT
ENHANCING THIS ORDINANCE WITH
SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
YOU MIGHT HAVE SEEN EXAMPLES
OF THESE AND OTHER COMMUNITIES.
WE ARE IN THE PROCESS
OF RESEARCHING MODELS AND
MECHANISMS TO REQUIRE ONGOING
ADDITIONAL SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS
FOR PROJECTS OF ALL SCALE.
WE ANTICIPATE BRINGING SOME
PRELIMINARY RECOMMENDATIONS OR
DISCUSSIONS TO THAT TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION ORDINANCE
REVISIONS COMMITTEE LATER THIS
OR IN LATE JULY AND I'LL STOP
THERE AND ADDRESS ANY QUESTIONS
THAT YOU MIGHT FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF C THREE COUNCIL
MEMBER BREAKS.
>> I WILL JUST JUMP IN TO SAY
HOW HAPPY I AM.
THE PLANNING COMMISSION RAISED
THOSE QUESTIONS AROUND SIGNAGE
COUNCIL MEMBER DESHWAL NOT THAT
I SENT HER MESSAGES AROUND THE
SAME IDEA AND SHE ASSURED ME
THAT PLANNING COMMISSION WAS
WAS AHEAD ON THIS AND SO STAFF
WAS SAVED FROM A FLURRY
OF EMAILS FROM AROUND US.
BUT YEAH, I THINK THAT THIS IS
ONE AREA THAT WE CAN REALLY
IMPROVE OUR COMMUNICATION TO
THE PUBLIC.
IT'S VERY COMMON IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES TO BE ABLE TO WALK
PAST THE SITE AND UNDERSTAND
KIND OF WHERE WE'RE A PROJECT
IS IN THE PROCESS AND HOW TO
PARTICIPATE AND IT'S A MUCH
BETTER WAY TO REACH RESIDENTS
ABOUT A PROJECT.
SO I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO
SEEING THOSE PROJECT THAT THAT
CHANGE COME FORWARD TO US
OTHERWISE I'M SUPPORTIVE
OF THESE CHANGES FOR THE
DISCUSSION COUNCIL MEMBER ALSO
JUST WANTED TO ALSO KNOW IF
THIS WORKS REALLY WELL WITH OUR
NEW ENGAGED E TO DOT GOV
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION OR YOU
KNOW, COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
HUB BECAUSE YEAH WHEN YOU GO TO
THAT SITE OTHER PROJECTS ARE
LISTED RIGHT AWAY CLICKING
CERTAIN OPTIONS TAKES YOU RIGHT
INTO THE STREAM PERMITTING
DATABASE AND SO FOR ONE I WAS
JUST LOOKING FOR A HOTEL THAT
IS ACTUALLY THEN YOU CAN SEE A
COPY OF THE ISSUES THAT WERE
RAISED AT THE COMMUNITY
PARTICIPATION MEETING.
I JUST THINK THIS URING THIS
ARRANGES THIS ALL AND PRESENTS
IT IN A WAY THAT'S MORE
DIGESTIBLE AND THE CONTACT
INFORMATION IN THE WAY TO
PARTICIPATE AND THE TIMELINE
FOR HOW THINGS PROCEED THROUGH
THE VARIOUS APPROVALS IS MUCH
CLEARER NOW ON THAT EIGHT TO
ENGAGE PLATFORM I JUST WANTED
TO GIVE A PLUG TO THAT AND
THANKS TO PLANNING STAFF FOR
MAKING US ALL FIT WITHIN THAT
COUNCIL MEMBER AKMAN SOMEONE
THAT'S BEEN ATTENDING THESE ARE
WE CALLING THEM RESIDENT
PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS FOR
THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS FOR
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT IN MY
WARD.
I AGREE THAT THE CURRENT
PROCESS IS VERY CONFUSING
BECAUSE RESIDENTS ARE GETTING
NOTIFIED ABOUT A POTENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT BEFORE THE CITY HAS
EVEN SEEN IT AND SO IN SOME
CASES GETTING TO THESE MEETINGS
VERY FIRED UP READY TO SEND
THEIR FEEDBACK TO US CITY
COUNCIL AND STAFF HASN'T EVEN
HAD A CHANCE TO REVIEW.
IT JUST LEAVES US IN A
SITUATION WHERE WE REALLY DON'T
HAVE ANYTHING TO RESPOND WITH.
>> AND YOU KNOW, ONE EXAMPLE
THAT I CAN THINK OF I BELIEVE
IT WAS A YEAR AGO IN THE SPRING
WE HAD THE RESIDENT
PARTICIPATION MEETING AND IF
I'M NOT MISTAKEN, THIS PROJECT
IS ONLY JUST NOW FINALIZING
STAFF REVIEW AND I JUST THAT'S
NOT A GOOD PROCESS.
BUT I GUESS ONE QUICK QUESTION
I HAVE IF I MAY IS HOW LIKE I
DO KNOW THAT THE DEVELOPER I
HAVE IN MY EXPERIENCE
DEVELOPERS ARE RESPONSIVE TO
THE FEEDBACK THAT IS PROVIDED
IN THOSE MEETINGS.
HOW WILL STAFF BE THINKING
ABOUT THE PARTICIPATION REPORT
THAT I SUBMITTED AND THEIR
REVIEW AND AND HOW DO WE
CONCEIVE OF THIS FEEDING INTO
ANY CHANGES THAT THE DEVELOPER
MIGHT CONSIDER?
>> YEAH, SO WE WILL BE ABLE TO
IT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
WE WILL THINK ABOUT IT IN THE
SAME TERMS THAT WE DO NOW WHEN
WHEN WE ARE PARTICULARLY
CONSIDERING THOSE PROJECTS THAT
HAVE SOME SORT OF DISCRETIONARY
APPROVAL.
WE CERTAINLY CONSIDER THAT
REPORT AS PART OF OUR
RECOMMENDATION.
THIS TIMING IS GOING TO ENABLE
US TO DO THAT BECAUSE WE HAVE A
REALLY ROBUST SIDEBAND PROCESS
THAT YOU MIGHT HAVE HEARD FROM
PETITIONERS IN THE PAST.
WE HAVE THE ABILITY TO MAKE
SURE THAT EVEN THOUGH WE'RE
STARTING SOME OF THAT REVIEW
WE'RE ABLE TO INCORPORATE THAT
FEEDBACK WHEN THERE IS SOME
SUBSTANTIVE ISSUE THAT WE THINK
THAT IS REALLY IMPORTANT TO
FRAME TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND OR THE CITY
COUNCIL AS A LEGISLATIVE
DECISION.
I WILL SAY THAT EQUALLY THAT
THE COMMITMENT TO ENGAGEMENT
AND SORT OF OF EVOLVING A
PROJECT I THINK THAT THAT IS A
TRAIT THAT IS PRESENT AND
PETITIONERS OR IT'S NOT I THINK
THAT THEY'RE PROBABLY AT I'M
GOING TO PRESUME THAT YOU'VE
BEEN TO SOME OF THOSE MEETINGS
WHERE YOU PROBABLY DIDN'T SEE
MEANINGFUL CHANGE OR EVOLUTION
FROM A PROJECT FROM THAT
PROCESS AS WELL.
AND SO SO I THINK THE
CALIBRATION OF TO THE ACTUAL
TECHNICAL REVIEW WITH MORE
INFORMATION IS NOT GOING TO
HURT OUR ABILITY TO TAKE THAT
FEEDBACK AND DETERMINE IF WHEN
AND HOW WE WANT TO INCORPORATE
THAT INTO ANY RECOMMENDATIONS.
BUT AGAIN, I THINK I I DON'T
THINK HISTORICALLY IT'S BEEN
NECESSARILY IN ITS CURRENT
FRAMEWORK EFFECTIVE IN SORT
OF FORCING A PARTY TO ENGAGE IN
THAT THAT WE'RE ALREADY
INTERESTED DOING THAT.
SO I JUST THINK THAT THE
LOGISTICS AND THE TIMING ARE
GOING TO MAKE MORE SENSE NOW
FOR THE DISCUSSION.
IF I COULD JUST ADD ONE THING
OF COURSE.
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR COMING ON
THAT.
I DO WANT TO HIGHLIGHT
SPECIFICALLY ONE OF THE
DIRECTIONS OF COUNCIL AND IN
PURSUING THIS WAS TO MAKE
NOTIFICATION OF THOSE PROJECTS
MORE WIDESPREAD.
AND SO THANK YOU, COUNCILMAN
PAUL WATSON JUST FOR
HIGHLIGHTING THAT WE'VE ALREADY
BEGUN TO IMPLEMENT THAT WITH
THE CITY'S NEW ENGAGEMENT TOOL.
AND SO I APPRECIATE YOU
REMINDING ME THAT THAT IS
ANOTHER STEP THAT WE'VE ALREADY
IMPLEMENTED DIDN'T REQUIRE ANY
ORDINANCE CHANGED AND WE'VE
ALREADY PUT THAT INTO EFFECT.
FURTHER DISCUSSION WILL FAVOR
POSED.
>> IT IS APPROVED DC ONE
RESOLUTION TO APPOINT MARK
HULTZ TO THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT BOARD AS A NON
REGISTERED ELECTOR WHO BY
COUNCILOR I WAS TAKEN BY
COUNCILMAN CROWN DISCUSSION.
>> HE'S A DC THREE COUNCIL
MEMBER QUINNELL REALLY BRIEFLY
I SERVE WITH MR DESTINATION RBA
BOARD AND I'M REALLY EXCITED TO
WORK WITH HIM AS PART OF THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION.
HE IS COMMITTED TO WHAT IS
GOING ON IN AND AROUND THE CITY
AND IS REALLY COMMITTED TO
MAKING SURE THAT WE PUT OUR
BEST FOOT FORWARD ESPECIALLY AS
IT RELATES TO TRAVEL AND
TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY AND
SORT OF THE ENGINE AND THE
VIBRANCY OF DOWNTOWN ITSELF.
SO I'M REALLY EXCITED TO WORK
WITH THEM.
THIS IS THIS IS GREAT FOR OUR
CITY.
FURTHER DISCUSSION WELL IN
FAVOR OR OPPOSED IS APPROVED
WITH ELEVEN COUNCIL MEMBERS
PRESENT THUS SATISFYING THE
SEVEN VOTE REQUIREMENT DC TWO
RESOLUTION TO AUTHORIZE
ACQUISITION OF AN EASEMENT FOR
THE SOUTH BOULEVARD WATER
LOOPING NEW CONSTRUCTION
PROJECT AND SOUTH BOULEVARD
LIFT THE STATION ILLUMINATION
AND GRAVITY SUER NEW
CONSTRUCTION AND REPLACEMENT
PROJECT MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGG SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER IGHER DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF DC TWO COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
.
>> THANKS NOT IN MY WORD BUT
SINCE WE DID HAVE SOMEBODY COME
AND BRING THIS UP I WAS JUST
CURIOUS OF STAFF IS HERE TO BE
ABLE TO COMMENT ON THE
OPPORTUNITIES THIS EASEMENT
MIGHT BE ABLE TO PROVIDE FOR
ENHANCED PEDESTRIAN
CONNECTIVITY IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I CAN TRY TO ADDRESS THAT.
THANK.
THAT WOULD REQUIRE GOING BACK
TO THE DRAWING BOARD BECAUSE
THE CURRENT APPROVALS ARE
LIMITED TO UTILITY EASEMENT
WHICH IS UNDERGROUND AND DOES
NOT TAKE OUT TREES.
IT WOULD IT WOULD JUST BE A
WHOLE SEPARATE DIFFERENT KIND
OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT.
OK, THANK YOU FOR THE
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OPPOSED.
>> IT IS APPROVED WITH ELEVEN
COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT THUS
SATISFYING THE EIGHT VOTE
REQUIREMENT DC THREE RESOLUTION
TO APPROVE AN AGREEMENT WITH
REVOKE LAU GROUP PC FOR LEGAL
SERVICES RELATED TO THE ANN
ARBOR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY MOVED BY COUNCILOR
CARNEL SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER WATSON DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF DC THREE
IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED
IT IS APPROVED FOR RESOLUTION
TO APPROVE AN AGREEMENT WITH
RIVENBARK LAU GROUP PC FOR
LEGAL SERVICES RELATED TO
ENERGY AND SUSTAINABILITY MOVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK AND MY
COUNCILOR BECAUSE HE HAD ONE
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC FOR OUR
FAVOR POSED IT IS APPROVED D
ONE RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING
SUMMARY PUBLICATION
OF ORDINANCE TWO FIVE TWO ZERO
AND ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION
TWO 5.2 TO NINE NINE BE
OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE OF TITLE FIVE
THE CODE OF THE STEPHEN HARPER
MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA
SECOND COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF TDS ONE ON
FAVOR OPPOSED IT'S APPROVED WE
HAVE BEFORE US DO WE HAVE A
CLOSED SESSION TODAY?
YES MAYOR I WOULD LIKE TO
REQUEST A CLOSED SESSION UNDER
MCO FIFTEEN POINT TWO SIX EIGHT
SECTION EIGHT ONE D TO CONSIDER
THE PURCHASE OF OUR LEASE
OF REAL PROPERTY AND EIGHT ONE
EIGHT PROVISION CONFIDENTIAL
MEMO PROVIDED TO COUNCIL ON
JUNE 13 TWENTY TWENTY FIVE MAY
HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO GO INTO
CLOSED SESSION ON THOSE BASES
MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
CORNELL'S SECOND COUNCIL MEMBER
ACHMAD DISCUSSION ROLL-CALL
PLEASE START WITH COUNCIL
MEMBER COUNCIL MEMBER YES
FABRIC'S YES HORNELL YES
ELSEWHERE DO YES BECAUSE WE'RE
HARRISON YES CUSTOMER WATSON
YES THAT'S RIGHT YES.
THAT'S WHERE.
YES YES YES YES COUNCILOR ER
YES WE'RE IN CLOSED SESSION SIX
WE'RE ON THE SIXTH FLOOR
IN
OPEN SESSION WE HAVE BEFORE US
THE CLERKS ARE PART
OF COMMUNICATIONS PETITIONS AND
REFERRALS MOVE A MOTION PLEASE
TO APPROVE THE CLERK'S SUPPORT
MOVE BY YOUR DISTRICT BY
COUNCILOR MALIK DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF THE SUPPORT COUNCIL
MEMBER.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO HIGHLIGHT
ITEM ONE ON OUR AGENDA THE
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
RESOLUTION ON NATURAL FEATURES
IN THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN AS NOTED BY PUBLIC COMMENT
EARLIER TONIGHT.
THE RESOLUTION WAS PASSED
UNANIMOUSLY BY THE
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION ON MAY
22ND.
THE RESOLUTION IS THE PRODUCT
OF MUCH WORK, DELIBERATION AND
CONSIDERATION BY OUR DEDICATED
COMMISSIONERS AS WELL AS CITY
STAFF INCLUDING STAFF FROM OUR
PLANNING LEGAL AND OSSI TEAMS.
THE RESOLUTION HAS A RESOLVE
CLAUSE THAT IS SEVERAL PAGES IN
LENGTH AND IS DEFINITELY WORTH
A READ.
>> I WOULD NOTE THAT BECAUSE
OF THE WORK OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION AND
OTHERS ADVOCATING FOR THE
INCLUSION OF NATURAL FEATURES
IN THE DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN DRAFT ONE OF THE PLAN
FROM APRIL MENTIONED NATURAL
FEATURES 32 TIMES BY MY COUNT
WHILE THE SECOND DRAFT RELEASED
JUST LAST WEEK MENTIONS NATURAL
FEATURES 45 TIMES.
MEANWHILE STRATEGY TEN POINT
ONE IN THE FIRST DRAFT OF THE
PLAN SIMPLY MENTIONS THE
EXISTENCE
OF THE CITY'S NATURAL
FEATURES PROTECTIONS WHILE THE
SECOND DRAFT EXPLICITLY SAYS
NATURAL FEATURES PROTECTIONS
WILL BE MAINTAINED.
>> AND THIS IS PROGRESS AND I
EXPECT TO SEE MUCH MORE
PROGRESS OVER THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS AS THE PLAN DEVELOPS
FURTHER.
>> LASTLY, I'D LIKE TO FORMALLY
REQUEST ADMINISTRATOR DONEES
PLEASE SUBMIT THIS RESOLUTION E
ONE ON OUR AGENDA TONIGHT TO
THE PLANNING COMMISSION FOR
CONSIDERATION.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
OF THE CLERKS REPORT ON FAVOR
POSED THE CLERKS REPORT IS
APPROVED.
>> DO WE HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
OUR CITY ATTORNEY?
NO THANK YOU MA'AM.
>> ALAS, IN THE ABSENCE
OF PUBLIC COMMENT OVERFLOW WE
HAVE A MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE
MOVE BY COUNSEL MCCONNELL.
SECOND MY COUNSEL PRIOR
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OPPOSE.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED